Let's analyze a policy together.  Anyone can start us with a policy idea.  Then others can add to the policy recommendation, add an economic interpretation, add a counter to the economic interpretation or modify any of the above.  One format to consider is shown below.  It would be great to work through one of these prior to the final assignment.  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Issue Number 1: 
--------------

Country: USA
Level of Government of Private Organization: Federal
Policy Recommendation: Fat Tax. You must list your BMI on your federal tax return and pay a fee based on a sliding scale for a BMI greater than 30.

Economic Logic: Monetary incentive to prevent obesity

Economic Evidence: People make short term decisions regarding nutrition and exercise everyday. A monetary consequence might raise awareness annually that these decisions are adversely affecting both the waistline and now the pocketbook.
The BMI is a measure based on height and weight. It is easily calculated and is supported by the CDC as a definition of obesity. There are drawbacks, but it is the single best measure that a person is obese in the US.

While there are several benefits to a standard measure and the BMI has been proposed, there are some arguments to be made against the use of BMI as the index to predict health at this individual level. A key example is that body-builders and professional athletes who are in great health have a high BMI due to high muscle-mass.

Potential for a Positive Net Benefit: Increased tax revenues which can be used towards healthcare/ obesity management, decreased rates of obesity

Counter Arguments: 
a. There could be risks to mental health associated with financial punishment for weight gain, which causes stress. Stress is known to cause many harmful health effects - we might trade one health problem for another. (Counter counter: Obesity is associated with mental health issues like depression which can lead to stress).
b. It is hard to implement this fairly and prevent fraud.
c. Using the BMI does not take into account any other health issues that might be causing obesity (such as genetical disorders, side-effects of other medication, etc.)
d. Requesting from all to see a doctor, without at the same time providing inclusive health coverage for all, might discriminate against the poor, who have less resources (both monetary and often in time also) to go and see a doctor. It would be less discriminatory if such visits are subsidized by the state (directly or through some sort of tax credit), at least for those in lower income tax brackets. 
e. Taxing the overweight and obese is tantamount to taxing them because they are either: poor and can't afford proper food, have a disease that affect their weight and not much can be done about it, have a poor level of literacy and can't get the proper informations easily, or that just make short sighted decisions about nutrition and exercise that adversely affect their long term health.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Issue Number 2
--------------

Country: USA
Level of Government of Private Organization: Federal or State

Policy Recommendation:
A) Provide a tax credit for accredited gym membership fees, up to $100 per month per household
B) Provide a tax incentive for gyms to provide free membership for the customers who attend on a regular basis (at least 3 times / week).  For example, if I pay $100 a month for a gym membership, receive a $20 discount for each week I go to the gym at least three times.  Of the $20, 50% would be subsidized by either the federal government, state government, or health insurance provider. 
Alternatively: The discount could be paid in the manner of a reward, and could be paid on a sliding scale based on measured improvement. Just going 3 times a week could achieve a $10 payment, but this could be increased in response to attaining certain weight loss goals.

Economic Logic: Monetary incentive to increase exercise

Economic Evidence:  In theory, reducing the price would increase demand and result in higher rates of attendance at gyms.

In comparable situation like government subsidy for Private ERs to treat patients with no insurance or cash, the instituion is the one that is paid and not the individual and this has infact lead to more consumption - which is a good thing in the case of gyms. Create a system similar to that where individuals who can afford should pay but for those below a certain income level, government or insurance should cover gym memberships. 

Counter Argument 1: 
No all consumers like to work out in the gym. Some like to walk/ bike or play sports outdoor or in their own homes. This policy is unfair to them. 

Counter Argument 2: 
Such a subsidy helps the gym private market and is unfair to other competitive markets. 

Counter Argument 3:
It might be more worthwhile to help public parks which is greener and provides better options. In places where the weather is good, outdoor workout machines in parts and recreation areas already maintained by the government makes more sense.

Counter Argument 4: 
Federal funds shouldn't be used to promote gym membership - who knows what people actually do at the gym?  is it of any value?  wouldn't funds be subject to fraud?

Counter counter argument:  The funds would just be used on health care bills anyway, might as well promote healthy lifestyle changes.

Counter counter counter argument: Most of the refund money would end up going to people who already attend the gym regularly and thus would not impact obesity levels. Saying that "the funds would just be used on health care bills anyway" is not a real argument for the proposed policy. The health care bills still have to be paid regardless. What we need to determine is the following: how much money will be saved by the government on health care costs due to the increase in health resulting from this policy, and is this money more than the amount this policy will cost?

Counter Argument 5:
The policy would not be based on equity, as not all citizens have same access to gyms, and most poor neighborhoods lack proper gym facilities. 

Current proposals: This is already being promoted as policy and being lobbied for as the PHIT Act: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PHIT_Act

[[Category:Coursera]]
[[Category:Biology]]
