What is this Course About?

Charles Severance: Hello and welcome to the Internet, History, Technology and Security. I'm Charles Severance and I'll be your instructor for this class. So I would like to think about when I design a class, like who should take this class. And lots of classes and various things are different levels on-line the smoke summer, junior level classes.

This is like a late high school, early college class. It's a survey class and we're going learn a bunch of things.  And Who should take this class.  And the answer, I think is absolutely everyone.  We use this internet, we touch this internet. You're watching this video over this internet.  It's gonna be a bigger and bigger part of our lives as time goes by. And... We just should all know something about it.

We don't have to be super programmers. And believe me, even though it is a technology class.  We're going to talk about technical things. We're gonna talk about packets and retransmissions.  You'll be surprised about how much cool stuff we learn in this class. But there's no math.  This is not a math class.  There's no programming.  You're not going to write any code. We're going to learn stuff and we're going to talk about that stuff.
And so, it's really to make you think. It's really to get to the point where you understand the internet well enough that you can talk about it and reason about it.

This course came about because I have some video. And I really believe that history is, history is kind of weird and lumpy, at least the parts of history that I know and have been part of. When people do something on PBS and talk about the history of the internet or history of technology, they tend to simplify it and turn it into sound bites. The real history is kind of lumpy. The actual people that do the innovation are sometimes just curious people, they're not necessarily successful, they're not necessarily wealthy, but they're very curious.

So what I wanted to do in this class, is not try to compress it down into just a couple of bullet points, but actually introduce you to people who have done things. And let you draw your own conclusions. Let them in their own words describe what it is, and give them, 8, 10, or even 15 minutes to explain to you what it was that they did.  And then you can take and then reflect on that. And we'll do that together. [That's] how this all works.

DR. CHUCK
I would like to start talking about who I am, so you get to know who I am.
I have a particular teaching style, as you will soon find out. I am from the University of Michigan.  The place is important. You'll be taking this all over the world.  That's wonderful and I'm glad you're watching.
I teach at the University of Michigan in a lovely building here on the North Campus called the North Quad.  They call it Quadworts, as a joke. If you ever get to Ann Arbor, MI walk through the building. It's just absolutely gorgeous.  And I teach this material in this very classroom. It's actually 2255 North Quad.  If you took this course from me on campus, there I would be standing, saying hi to you and talking.  I hope I'm a little bigger now, I'm like this big. I'm bigger now. I might even be on a big screen TV.

But I teach this material at the University of Michigan where I'm a clinical associate professor. The clinical means that I'm focused more on teaching and leadership than research.  Actually teaching and learning is my research. I've written a bunch of books and I'm very active in our teaching and the development of a new undergraduate program in information, a Bachelors of Science in information that we're developing.

So, to give a little history, like I mentioned, I have this video collection of all these people.  And I got this video collection because in 1995, right after the internet was just getting started, I wanted to tell people about it.  I mean, we in academia had known about it since the late 1980's but I just wanted everyone to know that this internet is cool and it's a new way of thinking and all these things.  So, I had friends that worked in the cable industry and me with my co-host Richard Wiggins, who you will see some of his videos as well.  We ended up with a series of television shows over a several year period that were produced by cable companies with the secret plan of promoting cable modems. We would sit on the set and you could see on the set that there's this little cable modem. Now hopefully your cable modem is a little smaller and more reliable or your network connection is more reliable.  We would sit on the set and say, "Look how fast our network is because of this awesome cable modem!"

So one of the excuses of the cable companies who made the show was to feature cable modems. Now the cable modems were barely working.  You could sometimes watch the old videos and see sweat pouring off our heads because we did things over and over and over and finally the cable modem would work.  Now I think things now are a little more reliable than they were.

And so, we loved this notion of sharing.  In 1994, 1995 and 1996 and even 1997 and 1998 the internet was a small place.  The people doing all the innovation and fooling around were very accessible.  So here we had a television show, you know, it was in a million homes, it was distributed around the country for a while. Tech TV came out and then that kind of ruined us. But we had cameras and we would go get a hold of people, meet them at a conference or something and stick a camera in their face and say, "I want to talk to you!"

So we got Tim Berners Lee and, we'll meet Tim later, and James Wells, one of the founding people in early in real audio. And we would just ask these people questions, ask them what the thought, what the future was going to be like. We'll meet a lot of people throughout the class. But I wanted to give you one person, who sort of really inspired me. He's not somebody who you would even know.

And so, here's James Wells of real audio:
