Greek and Roman Mythology
Fall 2012Dr. 
Peter Struck
Week 7
Lecture 7.10.


Readings of the Oresteia

In our closing, with our Oresteia, I thought what I'd do is return to our toolbox.
You will recall, we got a set of tools that we've been working on. Structurals and functionalism, myth and ritual, and psychoanalysis. And we've been having those around and dipping into them. When we run into something interesting in a myth, grab a tool, tinker with it. Grab another tool, tinker with the myth again and see what kind of results you get from this toolbox of theoretical tool.
 I'm going to pick up two and use them with the material that we've been working on in the Oresteia: Functionalism and structuralism.

Now, looking back at the kind of reading I've been doing in the most recent couple of lectures for the class, it's pretty clear that I've been doing already a functionalist kind of reading, haven't I?  
Remember functionalism says that myths are told, in order to legitimize certain social and cultural forms. So the kind of take I've been giving you all of, on the Oresteia is that what Aeschylus is up to here is telling a myth in a certain kind of historical context, he's telling a myth that is justifying and legitimizing a social norm of a new scheme of justice.
  As iterated in this court of the Areopagus, a long and deeply held traditional court in Athens. Talking about it as being important along these new democratic lines. That is very much straight forward functionalism, the vision that I'm offering here, and it's just a reading. 
There are many others that are possible of what Oresteia is all about. But the vision that I'm offering here is that Aeschylus has a sort of purpose to this telling of this story.  What purpose, what is making it so attractive and appealing to the audience that's seeing it, is that it is for them legitimizing a social cultural norm. This importance of  their institution of justice in the form of these courts. Now, I thought I'd toss in another one; a structuralist reading. 

This is one that came out of, I've taught this course many times here at University of Pennsylvania.  And I get e-mails from students all the time, as I'm teaching at them. One of them suggested to me, isn't it possible that what we have when we look at the Oresteia, is a meditation on a binary opposition between two ways of imagining the most important kind of social connections that are made between human beings?
On the one hand, we have social connection based on blood ties and on the other hand, we have social connections based on voluntary associations.  Those two means of trying to figure out how humans are supposed to be connected to one another, sometimes come into conflict and when they do, we've got difficulty and an urgency to try to figure out what's happening.
  Well, the difference between these two poles of blood ties on the one hand, and voluntary associations on the other hand, provide, as we've talked about when we were talking about structuralism, the voltage that makes this story tick and propels it forward.
 I actually think that that's a really interesting and good proposal. And I've been working on it over the years to try to clarify and bring some further insight to it.  Remember, structuralist are looking for binaries that are going to be the underlying drivers of the stories that they're talking about.  And in this particular reading, on the one side with the blood ties connection, we've got the Furies, we've got the idea of Miasma, the chronic deities that have blood tie connections. We've got the relationship between Atreus and his off-spring, and Agamemnon and his son, and Orestes and his mother.
 All these connections based on blood ties and all the difficulties that rise out of that.  

On the other side, the thing that Aeschylus is considering here is the new way of understanding how human society's organized around voluntary associations. Here blood ties are not so important. Remember Apollo's argument, playing down the connection between, in his case, the mother and the son, but between, otherwise what one would think of as having very strong blood relationship.
 Instead the kinds of associations that Apollo holds up and venerates are ones. Excuse me. Based on voluntary associations. In  particular here, the, association between Agamemnon and Clytemnestra.  
So volunteer associations taking on a stronger role and the back and forth between them though, is never fully resolved.

 Aeschylus is working on the tension between the two to provide the energy that propels the story forward. So a structural's reading could suggest that what we have here is a hidden binary that's pushing the story forward between raising and organizing a human society on the one hand, by blood relations, on the other hand by voluntary associations.
