Greek and Roman Mythology
Fall 2012
Dr. Peter Struck
University of Pennsylvania


Week 6.
Lecture 6.4

Themes in the Hymn to Demeter


In the Homeric hymn to Demeter, we have a strong focus on women's experience.

The main characters, the main driving themes are things that are connected specifically to this example of the human species that is gendered female.

In our Odyssey, by contrast, we've seen that the main point of this all was to look at the Andro, the Anthropos that was gendered male. Well, here, we're going to look at an anthropos that is gendered female and look at those kind of relationships, and the experiences that re specific to that part of what it is, to, what, it is to be human.

To start off, I thought we would take a look at a couple of pairs.

There are interesting doubleings that happen inside of the story. Metaneira and Demeter is the first one I wanted to say a few words on. With Metaneira and Demeter, we have an
interesting pair of figures. Metaneira is, near the end of her childbearing years, it says that she is someone who was waiting for a long time for Demophoon to come.
She was quite frightened that he wasn't going to come at all. She was praying to the Gods to see if he would come.
And then, Demophoon arrives and she's thrilled and excited by it. We have someone who is nearing the end of that reproductive window, and she's coming to a close on those childbearing years. Now she's entering into a maturing state of taking care of this child and raising it, and nurturing it, and moving along.

We meet in the figure of Demeter someone who, in the guise that she takes in the
story, is beyond her childbearing years. In her disguise, she shows up as a person who has just been cast aside. She talks about; She's referred to by people that see her sitting on the edge there before they know who it is.
They don't understand who the stranger is.They call her granny. They talk about her as having an appearance of someone who is long, caught off from child birth.

And when they do that, they start to peg her as a person who belongs in a society
only in certain places.
With that age come different rules for Demeter.
Most of these rules are not the kind of thing that a woman who is aspiring to a grand position in society would aspire to. Demeter is someone who has limited responsibilities and possibilities in this older stage of life.
She could be a housemaid, or a nurse. But she's not going to someone who has as
grand as a mother or head of a household.

Metaneira is, by contrast, Someone who can have those rules. She has a head of the household, the fullness of her reproductive powers has been shown through this through this child.

She has capabilities, and influence, and authority by those kind of powers of reproduction.
The same thing is mostly deprived of Demeter because of her position on the
other side of this divide.

Persephone interestingly shows up in this understanding this meditation as well.
She's making a transition of a certain kind from being a girl living with her mother to living in another man's home as a wife of some other person. This transition in the story is very clearly cast as a kind of violence done to her.
It's not a pleasant thing. It's painful for her and for her mother. Its great of its these single source of the most dramatic moments in the story and none of this drama is, is good drama. It's bad drama.
Persephone shows this transition into the husband's household as filled with fear and isolation, a loss of innocence, and she has to now re-imagine her relationships that she had, that were most dear to her with her mother and others.
This is made in to in her case, an absolutely explicit parallel between moving away from her matrilineal home, being pulled in to the home of her new husband the man who takes her away, in this case, being pulled away.
That is characterized specifically as a kind of death.
Persephone, who is an, an immortal, goes down and experiences what it is to be
dead. Gods mostly don't do that.
Poor Hades, he spends all his time down there, but none of the other gods do.
There are trips that they make here and there, but very few of them go. Most try to avoid it.

Why would a person want to go down there? Persephone lives as an immortal experiencing the life of a mortal after death. So, her position, positioning here as a
girl who is making a transition from childhood into adulthood is specifically characterized as a kind of death. It's quite heart wrenching, it's quite
poignant to think about all the kind of trauma that happened as a life goes, undergoes great change.

In Persephone, it's also characterizes her entering into the stage of fertility.
She now becomes, in the terms of the story, it's suggested and hinted that what's happening here is that Persephone is entering into the stage when her relationships with men are going to change.

The pomegranate seed is an interesting symbol, likely to be the, symbol of a
man's seed. And the fact that she took it in, is something that now changes her
status completely. You'll recall that when she comes back and has a moment of audience with her mother,  again after having been gone for so long, the mother is very nervous and asked, have you eaten anything? Have you partaken of anything down in that
underworld?

It's as though she already knows because she could, can see it in her daughter, and
having ingested the pomegranate seed means that now Persephone is now in a different
stage in her life. And again, it is not a happy moment.
It is a moment filled with drama and a certain kind of, pain and loss.
Now together, Persephone makes an interesting pair with Demophoon. Demophoon
is the child that we see who emerges out of in, at, in, for Metaneira late in her reproductive life.

And, she is the one that gives it over to Demeter to be raised.

Well, Demeter right away thinks, I have this investment in raising this child.
 Demophoon clearly represents for her a kind of substitute for the Persephone that
 she's missing.  She gets a chance to take this figure in and she brings Demophoon, interestingly, from his state as a mortal child and tries to bring him over into becoming an
immortal. Notice that she gives him no mortal food.  He doesn't have mother's milk. Instead, she gives him something amazing. She gives him ambrosia.
That's the kind of food that the gods eat. And in fact, in Homer's traditional association, the eating of ambrosia and drinking of nectar is exactly what the gods do.
And the more of it they do, the more they're like gods.
When humans get a chance to taste these things, they start to become show signs of
being immoral. So, it seems in the Homeric tradition, ambrosia and nectar actually connected with becoming a divinity itself.
So, then, if the keeping food away from Demophoon, human food and then giving the
ambrosia to him, bring him long toward the immortal side of things.
Then, also, this strange custom she has of burying him in the fire at night, which causes Metaneira to be a little upset, you can imagine.
Well, this is a linkage to blacksmithing, as you want to heat up metal and can make it harder, and firmer, and more durable. So also, Demeter is doing this with Demophoon.

She thinks that through this cycle of treatments with the ambrosia and with the
 fire, she's actually going to produce Demophoon a immortal character and she will then have replaced in some little, Or not replace, but she will have gone some way to recompense the loss of the immortality of her daughter.

So, in the book ends around the question of death, mortality, and immortality, we
have the figures of Demophoon and Persephone framing them, also Metaneira
and Demeter.

Demophoon is the mortal who is maybe making a transition to immortality.
Persephone, the immortal who is making the transition to mortality.
And, we have a lot of meditation that's done round this question of reproduction.
Human fertility and it's complexity. These are what the themes that are built
into our story. Each of them, interestingly, is connected with this question of, re, reproduction is connected with a question of mortality and immortality.

Both features, I think, are present in the idea of human reproduction.
We're reminded at each time, the birth happens, the marvelous miracle of new life
coming into the world. But, then also, each time those new lives are, are, are settled and we learn abou them, see them, there is some quality of them that also reminds us that, yes
indeed, all of us are mortal.

The miracle of birth is a reminder also of all of our mortality.

So, human fertility is built into this kind of complex and fragile set of ideas where a promise of immortality is tinged always with the specter and presence of mortality.
So, it's as though with enfolding these two things together, the whole, author of
the Homeric Hymn is telling us that we can't really have one without the other.
We can't have this reproductive desire to produce offspring together with
immortality, instead mortality is going to come with it.
The two of them are enfolded together.

Just behind me here we've got a wonderful freeze that has our Demeter and Persephone.
Demophoon may be this figure standing between the two of them or another figure, Triptolemus. And in later tradition, Triptolemus who's one of the figures in the household and Demophoon start to exchange places.
So, it could be that that's what our artist is representing here.
What we're seeing here is a set of, of, of meditations on really important core
themes about what it is to be interesting to human and this drama is put over on the
side of the gods.

We learn about stories through intimate portrayal of characters and going through
this upsetting, difficult times. These characters just happened to be immortals but they sure do seem extremely human.
