When did economics segment round opposite purposes for humanity? If you search The Economist from its birth in 1843, Macroeconomics only became a separated brand after world war 2. If you value Keynes as one of the most transparent system mapmakers , whose main works were published in 1930s and 1940s, it seems that up to Keynes most economists were aiming to design futures that advanced our next generations. If that's the sort of [http://facebook.com/microeconomics (micro)economics] that interests you - lets build a peer to peer curriculum of it at [http://worldeconomist.net worldeconomist.net] 

My fathers diaries on microeconomics were published at [http://normanmacrae.ning.com/forum/topics/norman-macrae-books-surveys The Economist between 1948 and 1988]- his last party was with Muhammad Yunus in 2008. We are hoping that youth capitalists inspired by Muhammad Yunus and 15 living Nobel Peace Laureates and [http://live.worldbank.org/millennials-endpoverty-2030 all millennials] with goals to end poverty and twin capital cities in job creation will have collaborated around a first common curriculum in time for 20000+ youth to test it out [http://youthcreativelab.blogspot.com November 2015 Atlanta]
===============================
1.1. An introduction to microeconomics

 

At a business and professional level, microeconomics can help answer questions like the following. How can my firm minimize its costs and increase its profits? What prices should I charge for my products? Should I invest in new plant and equipment? How should I respond to an aggressive strategic move by one of my competitors? 
 
At a personal level, microeconomics can help answer questions like the following. How can I maximize my grade point average given my time constraints? Will I really be better off financially if I quit my job now and go back for an MBA degree? What kind of career should I be preparing myself for? And what about that new refrigerator or automobile I want to buy? Should I get the new energy-efficient one with a higher price tag or settle for a cheaper model?
 

Microeconomics can explain why the government is so involved in the economic lives of individuals. It can do so by answering questions like the following. Why does the government regulate prices in some industries like electricity and gas but not in others? Why are there laws requiring seat belts and motorcycle helmets? Why do we have a federal environmental protection agency and thousands of rules about workplace safety? And why does the government provide some goods, like our national defense and lighthouses, and let the free market provide other goods, like hot dogs and computers? 
 

Microeconomics can help answer questions like these because it arms us with a very powerful set of conceptual and problem-solving tools.

These concepts can be powerful and helpful these as several stories about some fictional people in very real situations demonstrate. 
 
Priscilla Sanchez wants to buy a new refrigerator and her choice is between a very energy-efficient model that cost $750 or the identical refrigerator without the energy saving features for only $500. Since Priscilla just finished her course of microeconomics, she knows about the time value of money. So, after calculating the net present value of the energy savings on an electricity bill over the life of the investment, she realizes that the seemingly more expensive refrigerator is actually much cheaper.
 

Priscilla helped her husband Phil come to a similar conclusion on a completely different topic. Phil was thinking about entering an executive MBA program, but the tuition is very expensive, over $100,000 for the two-year program. Phil's problem in thinking through his decision was that he didn't know how to compare his up front cost of going to school with the future benefits that would come in the form of a higher salary and better promotional opportunities. 
 

So Priscilla once again got out her hand calculator and made some assumptions about Phil's future stream of income after he got his MBA. And it became pretty clear to both of them that the family would be better off financially over the long run with Phil in school now. And that is where Phil is.

He sits right next to Stuart Applegate in his Microeconomics class. 
 
Before losing his job and going back to school, Stuart was the chief executive officer of a high-flying computer software company. However, when his company started to lose money, Stuart's solution was to raise prices in the hopes of boosting revenues and profits. 
 
Unfortunately, Stuart came from an engineering background, and as he hadn't studied microeconomics, Stuart didn't understand that the demand for his company's product was what economists call highly elastic. In such a case, raising prices actually reduces both total revenue and profits. The result was that Stuart's pricing strategy bankrupted the company.

 
Fortunately, Jean Twilley was a lot smarter when confronted with a similar situation in her job as a financial analyst in the operations department for the transit authority in Paradise California. Facing a revenue shortfall, Jean ordered an analysis of the elasticity of demand for bus services. When she found that bus demand was also highly elastic, she recommended to her supervisor that the transit authority lower bus fares. This pricing strategy did indeed increase ridership and boost total revenues. It also earned Jean a nice promotion.

 

It was a totally different set of microeconomic tools that helped Jong Chan get a different kind of promotion - one into medical school. Jong's problem was that at the end of his freshman year in college, his grade point average was only 2.9. However after taking a course in microecononics Jong used the concept of opportunity costs and the tool of the possibilities frontier to more efficiently allocate his studying time across various subjects. The result? By the end of his senior year Jong had raised his grade point average to 3.8.

It's too bad that Jong's father, Nai-fu, didn't receive the same training in microeconomics as his son. 
 
Which isn't to say that Nai-fu Chan isn't a success himself. After all, he's a newly elected member of Congress from the Los Angeles area. However, in his first term last year, Congressman Chan tries to pass some legislation that would have forever eliminated any kind of price regulation in the entire transportation industry. 
 
While such price deregulation makes a lot of sense in an industry like trucking which is highly competitive, it makes very little sense for the railroad industry, which is in essence a natural monopoly that will gouge consumers with high prices in the absence of government regulations. Fortunately, Congressman Chan's bill didn't pass.

1.2.1. Microeconomics versus macroeconomics
 

Microeconomics focuses on the behaviour of individual markets and the smaller individual units that make up the broader economy, which are businesses, consumers, investors, and workers. Microeconomics is distinguished from macroeconomics which focuses on problems in the broader economy like inflation and unemployment and the rate of economic growth. 
 
Adam Smith is usually considered the intellectual forefather of microeconomics. In his classic book, The Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, Smith considered how individual prices are set, studied the determination of prices for land, labor, and capital and examined the strengths and weaknesses of the free market mechanism. 

Most importantly he identified the remarkable efficiency properties of perfectly competitive markets.


1.2.2. Economic order
 
Using his now famous invisible hand analogy, Smith argued that the self interested actions of individuals actually guide market outcomes to yield great econmic benefits for the broader society. 
 
While Adam Smith's keen insights will provide an important foundation for many discussions in our study of microeconomics, it is also true that in the United Staes, as well as virtually all other nations of the world very few sectors of the economy fulfill Adam Smith's vision of a perfectly competitive marketplace delivering goods and services at lowest price and highest quality. In fact, the US as well as most other modern industrialized nations, has what is called a mixed economy.
 

At one end of this mixed economy, we have industries like farming and mining. These industries are characterized by many buyers and sellers and come closest to approximating Adam Smith's model of perfect competition. 
 
At the other end of this mixed economy, we have pure monopolies like the Post Office, characterized by one seller and run by the government. In between these two poles of perfect competition and monopoly, there are numerous oligopolies. From the tobacco and chewing gum industries to automobiles and oil. 
 
Oligopolies are industries which typically have a small number of large firms. Many of America's largest industries are oligopolies much more likely to engage in collusive practices such as price fixing than the type of fierce competition envisioned by Adam Smith and his invisible hand.


In contrast to Adam Smith's free market economy and America's mixed economy, a command economy is one in which the government makes all the important decisions about production and distribution.
 
 In a command economy such as the one which operated in the Soviet Union, the government owns most of the means of production, land and capital. It also owns and directs the operations of enterprises in most industries. It is the employer of most workers and tells them how to do their jobs. It also decides how the output of society is to be divided among different goods and services.
 	 
	 

1.2.3. Three questions

Regardless of whether a country has a command or mixed economy it still must answer three basic questions. What shall be produced, how shall it be produced, and for whom shall it be produced for? In answering these three basic questions, a country must address three basic facets of economic and political life, scarcity, efficiency, and equity.

 

Scarcity is the first issue. If infinite quantities of every good could be produced, there would not be economic goods, that is goods that are scarce or limited in supply. All goods would be free like sand in the desert or seawater at the beach. 
 
In such an Eden of affluence, people wouldn't have to worry about stretching out their limited incomes to fulfill their wants. Businesses wouldn't worry about costs and profits when they produce their products. Governments wouldn't have to tax their citizens to build things like roads and bridges. And there would be no distinction or political and economic conflict between rich and poor because everyone would have everything they needed and wanted. Prices in markets would be irrelevant and economics would not be a useful subject.
 

Clearly no society has reached such a utopia of limitless possibilities. Instead, while goods are limited, wants are seemingly limitless. Indeed after two centuries of rapid economic growth, production in the United States is still not high enough to meet everyone's desires. 
 
Outside the United States, particularly in Africa and Asia, hundreds of millions of people suffer from hunger and material deprivation every day.

Faced with the undeniable fact that goods are scarce relative to wants, an economy must decide how to cope with limited resources.
 

 It must choose among different potential bundles of goods, the what, select from differing techniques of production, the how, and, decide in the end who will consume the goods, the for whom. In a very real sense then the essence of economics is to acknowledge the reality of scarcity and then figure out how to organize society in a way that produces the most efficient use of resources. 
 
Efficiency denotes the most effective use of a society's resources in satisfying people's wants and needs.

Allocating resources efficiently is all the more complicated because in pursuing efficiency there is almost always a very thorny trade-off between what is efficient from an economic point of view and what may be viewed as fair or equitable from a social and political point of view. In fact grappling with the trade-off between efficiency and equity is one of the most difficult tasks of economist and the political and business leaders they serve.
 

For example, from a microeconomic view, the most efficient way to regulate electricity prices would be to charge individual consumers much more than businesses for the same unit of electricity. Such a pricing creates enormous political problems because it is people rather than businesses that vote in our democratic system. Moreover, many would argue that it simply would not be fair to charge people especially the poor and elderly more than big corporations for the same product. In a similar vein, almost any time the government tries to raise taxes to redistribute income from the rich to the poor through mechanisms like food stamps or Medicare, those taxes tend to interfere with the efficiency of the free market.



1.3. The production possibility frontier and opportunity costs
 
 



 	
	 

To illustrate the concepts of scarcity, efficiency and equity, the production possibilities frontier (PPF) can be used. The PPF shows the maximum amounts of production that can be obtained by an economy given its technological knowledge and quantity of inputs or resources available. It represents the menu of goods and services available to society. If a country is operating on its PPF, it is allocating resources efficiently. 
 
The important idea behind the PPF is that societies cannot have everything they want. They are limited, not just by their resources, but also by the technology available to them.

Therefore, societies must choose between goods, and one of the broadest choices that virtually every country is forced to make is between producing guns vs butter. 
 

In particular how much of a country's resources should go to the military, the guns. And how much should go to civilian uses like education and health care and the production of consumer goods like computers and automobiles, that's the butter. 
 

This choice can be illustrated using PPF diagram for the mythical country of Tough Choice. Butter production is represented on the horizontal axis and guns production is represented on the vertical axis.
 	 
	 
If the leaders of tough choice were to use all the country's resources to produce butter, it would produce five million pounds. And be at point F in the figure given its current technology. Alternatively, if Tough Choice were to produce only guns, it would be at point A, or 15,000 guns. Between these two extremes of only butter and only guns, Tough Choice also can produce many combinations of guns and butter, as illustrated by points B, C, D, and E. For example, by foregoing one million pounds of butter production, Tough Choice can increase its guns from 9,000 at point D to 12,000 at point C.

Such a movement along the PPF illustrates one of the most important concepts in microeconomics, which is opportunity costs. 
 
On the most fundamental level, the opportunity cost of moving from D to C is the butter given up to produce the extra guns. In this example, the opportunity cost of the 3,000 extra guns is one million pounds of butter forgone. 
 
In a world of scarcity choosing one thing means giving up something else. The opportunity cost of a decision is the value of the good or service forgone. Because resources are scarce, we must always consider how to spend our limited incomes or time.
 	 
	 
This concept can be used on other choices as well. Voters can choose between private goods like autos and houses, bought at a price, and public goods like roads and bridges, paid for by taxes. A frontier society is likely to be at point A because the society lives from hand to mouth with little left over for public goods like super highways or public health.
 	 
	 
However, with economic growth and technological change, a modern urbanized and more prosperous economy will have a PPF shifted significantly outward relevant to the frontier society. In this case, this society may choose to be at point B, spending more of its higher income on public goods and services, like education, environmental protection, and roads.
 	 
	 
It's not just what a society chooses to consume that matters, it's also when it chooses to consume it. There is a choice between consuming goods like autos and watches and tennis rackets now, or investing in machinery and factories. Three countries can start out even with the same PPF. However, the Kingdom of Jiminy Cricket, as indicated by A1, does no investment for the future, while the Aristotle Republic invests modestly at A2, while Thriftyland sacrifices a great deal of current consumption to invest heavily at A3.
 

 


 	



	 
After some time, the PPF of Thriftyland has shifted significantly outwards, allowing the sons and daughters of Thriftyland's investors to live a more prosperous life. Meanwhile the Kingdom of Jiminy Cricket remains mired at the same standard of living on its original PPF. The important point here, of course, is that by sacrificing current consumption and producing more capital goods, a nation's economy can grow more rapidly.
 	 
	 
The PPF can be used to shed further light on the concept of economic efficiency. There is a trade off between guns and butter. Point D is unattainable given the society's available technology, resources, and labor force. Point A is an inefficient point, because there is a way to produce more of guns or butter without having to give up any of the other. For a society, the idea that is to stay on the PPF at points like C and B.


 
1.4. The fundamental concepts of microeconomics and course overview

 

 

In lectures 2, 3 and 4, it is investigated how the forces of supply and demand reach equilibrium in the product markets, for example the market for consumer goods like autos and shoes and computers. Such an equilibrium can be illustrated using a figure. The price of the good in this case, corn flakes, is on the vertical axis. The quantity of the corn flakes is on the horizontal axis. The demand curve slopes downward. This reflects the idea that the lower the price, the more corn flakes the consumers will want to buy. 
 
Similarly, the supply curve slopes upward indicating that as prices rise, businesses will be willing to provide more corn flakes. The powerful idea behind this figure, is that the price in the market will tend to be set where the supply and demand curves cross.
 	 
	 
In order to understand exactly why this equilibrium happens, each of the components of these curves are studied. 







 

 

To understand the downward slope and shape of the demand curve, and indeed why that curve may also shift, the theory of consumer of household behaviour is researched. By the same token, to figure out why the supply curve slopes upward, production theory, which examines why firms price and produce products the way they do, is treated.

After investigating these demand and supply curves, it will become very apparent why prices tend towards an equilibrium where the two curves cross. 
 
Lectures 5, 6 and 7 discus the broader issue of how markets are organized and structured. In this stage it will be shown that when a market meets Adam Smith's test of being perfectly competitive, its invisible hand allocates resources in the most efficient way possible without any help or interference of the government.
 

However, in this part of our studies, it will also be shown that markets are prone to various kinds of market failures that may require the government to intervene to correct these failures. 
 

The three most important market failures involve imperfect competition, such as monopolies, externalities, such as pollution, and public goods, such as national defense. In each case, the market failure leads to inefficient production or consumption, and government can play a useful role in solving or reducing the problem.

 

For example, when there is only one seller in the marketplace, a monopoly. That seller tends to set prices too high and consumption is too low relative to the most efficient outcome that would occur in a market with numerous buyers and sellers. In such a case, government intervention into the market may be appropriate. And such intervention may involve regulating prices and profits or prohibiting actions such as price fixing.

 

A second type of market failure involves negative externalities and positive externalities. In the case of a negative externality, a company may produce steel and sell it for the market price. In manufacturing the steel, the company will incur costs for its machinery and raw materials and labor. And those direct costs to the firm, will be subtracted from its revenues to calculate its profits.
 
 However, in a free market, what the company does not take into consideration are, the broader external costs it may impose on society, in the process of making the steel.

Such costs arise, for example, when a company pollutes the river adjacent to its plant or the air basin over the nearby town. 
 
We'll learn that in the presence of negative externalities, like pollution and congestion. The free market produces too much of the good, steel in this example, at too low a price. In such a case the government may want to regulate or tax the polluters. While in the presence of positive externalities associated with goods like education and vaccinations, government subsidies may be appropriate to internalize the externality.
 

Still a third market failure involves so-called public goods like national defense and lighthouses. The problem with public goods, is that they are non-rival in consumption, meaning that my use of, say, a lighthouse doesn't interfere with your use of that same lighthouse. 
 

This is very different from goods that are rival in consumption, like hamburgers and shoes. If someone eats the burger, or wears the shoes, someone else cannot. The typical solution to the public goods problem is for the government to step in and provide them. 
 
That is why it is the government that is in charge in providing many public goods, from national defense in the criminal justice system, to parks, roads and bridges.
 
The crucial importance of the concepts of the market failure, is that it helps us better understand the many reasons, good and bad, while the government may get involved in the affairs of businesses and the lives of people. It is especially important for people in business to understand the economic role of government, because government rules and regulations have as much or more to do with the bottom line profits of most companies than any competitor's actions.

 

1.5. Other reasons for government regulation
 

Ev en if there are no failures in the market, there may be a political or ethical problem with how wealth and income are distributed, that triggers government intervention into the free market. 
 
To see this, assume for the moment that the economy is functioning with complete efficiency, always on the production-possibility frontier and never inside it, always choosing the right amount of public versus private goods and so forth. 
 
Even if the market system works perfectly, it might still lead to a flawed outcome. This may happen, because incomes are determined by a wide variety of factors including effort, education, inheritance, factor prices, and luck.

The resulting income distribution may not correspond to a fair outcome. A rich man's cat may drink the milk that a poor boy needs to remain healthy. This is not happening because the market is failing. 
 

The market mechanism is doing its job, which is putting goods in the hands of those who have the dollar votes. Put another way, If a country spends more fertilizing its lawns than feeding poor children, that is a defect of income distribution, not of the market. Even the most efficient market system may generate great inequality. 
 
In this regard, if a democratic society does not like the distribution of dollar votes under a free market or laissez-faire market system, it can take steps to change the distribution of income.
 	
	 
For example, it can engage in progressive taxation, taxing large incomes at a higher rate than small incomes, or impose heavy taxes on large inheritances to break the chain of privileged by the same token. 




 
because low tax rates cannot help those who have no income at all, governments can make transfer payments which are money payments to people. Such transfers today include aid for the elderly, blind and disabled and for those with dependent children, as well as unemployment insurance for the jobless and food stamps and low cost housing subsidies for the poor. This system of transfer payments provides a safety net to protect the unfortunate from privation, and they are paid for from taxes levied on the more privileged.
 

It is usual to ask, at this point, what can economics contribute to debates about equality? Economics, as a science, cannot answer such normative or prescriptive questions about how much of our market incomes, if any, should be transferred to poor families. This is a political question that can be answered only at the ballot box, or in some countries, at the point of gun.   a 


This table summarizes the various reasons for, and ways that the government can intervene in the private marketplace. Take a few minutes to study this table. Note that the bottom half of the table deals with issues in macroeconomics. While it is the top half dealing with inefficiency and inequality that shall be our focus in microeconomics.


 
1.6. An overview of land, labor, and capital markets; externalities and public goods

 

Lectures 8, 9, and 10 delve further into the business side of the supply and demand equation by studying how firms use the three so called factors of production, land, labor and capital. These factors are the three major inputs into the production process, where the final goods and services that are produced are called the outputs. 
 
A study of the labor market will help to understand how wages are determined, while an analysis of the capital markets will help to better understand how to evaluate the profitability of investments, such as those in new planned equipment. Studying land economics gives a better grasp of how rents are set in real estate markets.
 
Along the way, a number of very important analytical tools are treated, such as concepts like net present value and rate of return, that will be of enormous use in business and personal lives. 
 
Lecture 11 looks much more closely at two particular market failures, which are externalities and public goods, both of which provide important rationales for large scale government intervention into the private marketplace.
