# Week 4 Lecture 9: 4-9 Changes in n, m, h, vm  
  
So hello, once again. This is Roger Coke Barr and I'm here for the Bioelectricity course. We're in week four. This is segment number nine. In the last segment we were talking about the Hodgkin-Huxley model, putting it all together, and we were saying that the really enormous achievement was to be able to shift in time from one moment to the next. I thought it was, would be worthwhile to come back and say again how that shift is accomplished from a little more mathematical point of view. Okay.   
  
Let's suppose we start off. We know, when we start off, iStem, im, we also know vm n, m, and h. We might think of istem and im as being biased from our environment. That is that our membrane is effected by, but that originate from other sources. So these are external. 
We might think of vm and m and h as being values that this patch of tissue maintains for itself. So those values are, you might say, internal. These internal values are what I am also calling the state variables. Our task now is to use this set of starting values for a starting time. And find out happens, find out how to get to a subsequent time. Assuming that the transition is short. So we're assuming the delta t is just a little. So let's go through and just outline how that is done. There are two processes. One process, is the process for vm. The second process is the process for vm and h. Because vm and n, m and h, all of these have to move forward. For vm, as we've seen, it's not too hard. We compute the ionic current, by computing each of the component currents separately, and adding them up. Once we have the onic art here we can project forward using our projection equation there, we can find the value of dvm. It goes with the value of delta-t that we have chosen.
Once we find dvm, we could use it here. Add it to the, the present VM, which is there.
And find a new VM, which here I've designated VM number one. Meaning, one time shift forward. So we've moved VM forward.  
  
Now we have to do the same thing all over again for N, M, and H. For N, M, and H, we have to get the alphas and the betas. We have to get all six of the alphas and betas. Notice that these come from vm, even though, over here on side number two, we are not in the process of updating vm. We have to know the M. Because we have to know the M to get the alphas and the betas. As soon as we get the alphas and betas, we can get dndt, dmdt and dhdt. Because each of those has a simple equation. And then, of course, as soon as we get DN, we can update DN and say. N for the time number one will be equal to its current value, N + DN. We can do the same thing for M and for H and thereby get a value at new time, time number one, from the values that we started off with. So by doing side one and then side two, we update the whole entire set. Let me make one final note about this process. Although we have issues on the left. With VM, projection on the left for VM, and a projection on the right for NM and H. The two sides are not independent one from the other. We have to know n, m, and h in order to get these currents. And we have to know VM.
In order to get the alphas and betas. So each side intertwines with the other. The projection process is independent. But the, the projection process is independent in the sense that, it projects for VM, or it projects N, M and H. In that sense, they're distinct.
On the other hand, getting a new value for VM requires all four of the state variables getting a new value for N, M, and H requires all four of the state variables. Well, I liked this picture of the [inaudible] with the cracks in this section because I thought it illustrated all this intertwining back and forth that's present with VM, N, M and H. And I hope it brings that to your mind as well. Thank you for watching. I'll see you in the next segment.
