# Week 4 Lecture 7: 4-7 Problem Session I_Na  
  
**This transcript does not match the video lecture. It has been reported, and this page will be updated if a new transcript is provided. I will leave this page as it is because it may be useful to someone.**  
  
---
    
This is Roger Coke Barr for the bioelectricity course. We're in week four, segment number seven. This is our problem session segment for this week, the first of them and we're going to talk about how to compute some of these ionic currents.

Let's suppose that we are using the standard parameter values, state variables etcetera that we were given a couple of slides back. There is no stimulus current at this particular time. But the voltage as you recall from the standard values is not at the resting potential. It's around about eleven millivolts. So the question is for this voltage and these state variables what is IK, Ina, and the leakage current IL. And then if these currents are maintained without change for 100 microseconds, what would be the change in VM? So just right on the face of it without knowing what the change is going to be. We feel sure that there is gonna be a change, because the volt, voltage is certainly not stable at -eleven millivolts. Let's consider the problem in parts. First of all, if for IK, we have a expression that's, we've established for IK. Ik is equal to G bar K into the fourth. Probability n to the fourth, VM minus EK. We consider what each of these terms mean, GK is the conductance if all channels are open. n to the fourth is the probability.
Channels being open, VM minus CK is often called the driving force. For potassium ions, the difference between the present voltage and the equilibrium voltage for potassium.
This is a straight forward section of this question. You put in the numbers and you compute the answers. Not only that, but we would say parts B, part B for Ina, part C for IL can be done in essentially the same way, but of course, substituting in the correct values for each of the respective components.   
  
So let's go on to part D of this problem. This is the interesting part. We wanna know, what is the change in the trans-membrane voltage? Now, some time ago, we established an equation for change in voltage with passive tissue. And for passive tissue, it was this equation right here at the top. And told us how to compute a change in voltage from a given voltage. Well, our situation right now is a little easier than before, because our situation right now is that our stem is equal to zero. The problem in our present situation is that we, because the tissue is now active, VM over RM is no longer, no longer useful. And the reason it's no longer useful is we don't know what RM is, at this moment.
Before we used a value for RM that's okay if the tissue is passive. That is the tissues at rest. We don't know what RM is, right now. So we've got to do something about this RM via mova RM term. And of course that's easy to do based on the material that's already been presented, we know that what we can do, is we can replace this term by I ion. An I ion is IK + Ina + IL. And then with that replacement, we can use the equation just found to find the change in vm. Now there's one more, note, I should add. What is the right value, to put in for, DT. Well in the original question it said a 100 microseconds. Here in this restatement it says only 50 microseconds. Let me tell you the factors that are involved.
If you're gonna do a hand calculation, you wanna make the step as big as you can. The biggest you can make it and still get assessable result. Is 50 microseconds. Dt to 50 microseconds is a useful number for a hand calculation but not any bigger than that.
So if you wanna do a 100 microseconds as asked originally it needs to be in two 50
microsecond stacks. For automated calculation, I'll write by hand. Dt, maybe more like, one, microsecond. If it's automated so in a computerized calculation, we would prefer to set DT to say, one microsecond and get to 100 microseconds as 100 accumulated steps of one microsecond each. That way we could recompute the values of N and M and H. After each mark or second, we could recompute the currents, and we could maintain a much more accurate flow of information. Try to see if you can complete this problem, all four parts, A, B, C, D. You'll find that the result is informative and, I hope, you'll put in these parameter values and compute the change in VM. Does VM go up? Does VM go down? This is where it starts. Is it up? Or is it down? You'll know the answer. How this all works. How the numbers come together to build a composite action potential. Well, it's like the cars on the train. Just like these cars. All these different cars have to link together and it's the composite result. Still, how it works is a little bit of a mystery as we think about it in our minds, you know?  
  
The reminds you of the poet saying, the woods are lovely, dark and deep. And in that spirit, I show you a picture of some woods they are along Science Drive, here at Duke University. Thank you for watching. I'll see you in the next segment.
