# 5-5 Grid Divisions of a 1D Model  
  
Hello again. This is Roger Coke Barr for the Bioelectricity course. And we're in week five about the track,laying the track, and we're at segment number five. Now. This is not going to be a long segment, in fact, it seems so obvious right at first. But let's talk about segmenting the one day model. Here we have a one day fiber. We want to compute what is happening in our fiber from place to place. It gets to be a little bit complicated. And the reason its a little bit complicated, is we have to compute currents going in more than one direction. We have to compute currents that are going in and out of the fiber, I'll signify that by this blue arrow, and we have to compute currents that are going along the fiber. Might say we have to compute currents in X and in Y. As we do that, it's helpful in many cases to think of the fiber as broken up into segments. Now, this breaking up,Doesn't mean that the fiber is literally broken up. It means that for purposes of doing a calculation, we are imagining that the fiber is broken up into different segments. And I mark the center of the fiber at each successive segment with a red dot. So we'd say. The segment here near the middle, how far,how big is this segment?So maybe this is delta X of 100micrometers.It'll certainly be less than a millimeter. It might be less than 100 micrometers but that gives you an idea of how long the segments are. As soon as we have broken the fiber up into segments, then we can calculate the membrane resistance. For the currents going out of the wall of this segment, we can calculate a membrane capacitance. For currents going out of the wall of this segment. And most importantly, we can have a single value of vm that we assume is present. Throughout this entire segment, so the core assumption of what we are doing if we, we are saying, well across the length of this segment, here I'll make a line here; we're saying well, across the length of this segment the membrane voltage, the trans-membrane voltage is equal to a constant. You remember the discussion of a membrane patch. I think this was back in week two. In the discussion of a patch, it said that the idea of a patch was that a patch be big enough that all the different channels and pumps are represented in proportion to their true numbers. And on the other hand, the definition of a patch was that it be small enough that we could assume, to good accuracy, that there was no variation in the trans-membrane potential across the patch. So here, the crucial assumption is that Vm is equal to a constant at whatever spacing we assume. Now that's a checkable assumption. And I can tell you that a hundred microns is gonna tend to be on the big side, but it might work. As you get much more than that, things will not work. And the assumption is a bad assumption. And the calculation will run into trouble. On the other hand, if you make the patch size too small, then the amount of calculation grows large and the stability, numerical stability, of the calculation may come into doubt. Depending on how you do it. So, there's an art to choosing these segment’s lengths. On the other hand, the fact that you take a long fiber and divide it into segments is common practice and very, very useful and we will do that here. So, once again, the membrane itself is continuous. The division into patches, is something we put on it, for our own utility as we proceed to do analysis. It's a part of building the track. Part of the way that we do it. You might say, in a very loose sense, it’s like putting down the cross ties on the railroad before you actually put down the rails. You have to put down the cross ties so that you have a way to support the rails. Here we have to create the segments as away to support our calculation. So here, well, is a nice picture of one of the dormitories on the Duke campus. You could say these people have built these walls as a way to support the residents inside the camp-, inside the dormitory, who are then inside the university. In the same way, we segment our fiber as away to support our calculation and find out what the fiber as a whole is doing. Thank you for watching. We’ll see you in the next segment.
