# 4.1 Cycles of Radiation and Extinction
I'm Bruce Fouke from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. We need to put together a framework to understand how all living organisms are related to each other, but also how they have systematically and sequentially replaced each other or moved forward through geological time, and so we need to think about the idea that nature keeps running experiments of the origination and then the evolution and proliferation of organisms within a given ecological environment, and then having that environment change, and response of the organisms is to have either all or most of those organisms go extinct. Once organisms go extinct, they're replaced by other organisms that can do better in that environment than they did, because they didn't have the characteristics they needed, the characteristics of reproduction, seeking food, being able to protect themselves, all the things that make it possible to succeed in being alive in an earth environment. Organisms have those characteristics, the earth environment is structured such that they can do well until the earth environment changes, and then once that environmental change takes place, then those organisms are the ones who don't do well; they go extinct and they get replaced by something else. 

So in that context, the basic tree of life that was established by Professor Carl Woese at the University of Illinois, that basic tree of life is a threefold structure. There are three basic branches, the branch of the Bacteria and the branch of the Archaea, the first two branches. Those are single-cell organisms that reproduce asexually. Then the third branch of life are the Eukarya, the multi-cell organisms that reproduce sexually, for the most part. So, we want to think about that being the road map of life. Then within those three branches we want to think about how has life changed systematically through the history of Earth, from very early Earth, when Earth was extremely different from what it is now, chemically and physical, and biologically too, and Earth that we know of in the modern-day environment. So we want to put the template of a changing Earth on top of the three branches of life, and the way we do that then is as we move up the three branches of life, then we can evaluate the upper parts of the tree and how they branch. Each of those branches in the upper parts of the tree of life are representing changes through evolutionary biological processes that create and form different kinds of life as time goes forward. 

So what we want to do is look at an Earth where we were moving from having single-cell organisms only to multi-cell organisms, and the advent of the incredible radiation and diversification of these metazoans, the multicelled organisms, and having the metazoans go from having an organism that has no skeleton to an organism with skeleton, because once the skeletons were formed by metazoans, and that's what we define as the Cambrian explosion at 543 million years before present, everything changed, in terms of the development and the structure of how metazoans could interact with their environment. So the way we do that is that we consider first of all what were the primary natural experiments that nature had run in order to see how these things fit together in the puzzle pieces. 

And so one of the first ones that were run by nature was called the Ediacaran fauna, and this was a group of organisms that were metazoans. They had no skeletons, and they came on board, they originated, they radiated right after a catastrophic event in earth history called the snowball Earth. This group of unique organisms though, they themselves went extinct. They were relatively short-lived, and they were replaced by a group of organisms that were metazoans that had skeletons. And the skeletons at first were all exoskeletons, they were on the outside of the body of the organism, and then as time evolved through the Phanerozoic, then we saw the advent of metazoans being able to synthesize and secrete a skeleton that was interior, and we call those vertebrates. So we move from an invertebrate Earth to an Earth that had both vertebrates and invertebrates and we see how that structural design feature allowed them to really do well in these evolving Earth environments, both in the terrestrial environment and in the oceans. Within that grouping of geological time that goes from the 543 million year Cambrian explosion through the Modern, we call that the Phanerozoic, and that Phanerozoic is broken into three primary groups of what we call fauna, and the fauna are the groupings of animals. 

The first grouping of animals was called the Cambrian fauna, the second grouping of animals was called the Paleozoic fauna, and the third grouping of animals was called the Modern fauna. And then the changes sequentially, going from the Cambrian fauna into the Paleozoic fauna into the Modern fauna, it was benchmarked, it was truncated, it was defined by Earth processes, one of the most important of which was meteor impact. 

So when large meteors slammed into the earth, they caused a lot of organisms to go extinct, and each time those massive extinction events took place, then nature would respond by once the catastrophe took place and some geological time went forward, then new organisms evolved and moved into those ecological zones that were previously inhabited by another type of organism. And we see that there's this basic threefold structure of having organisms respond to new and open ecospace in which they could radiate and evolve, and then have the whole system reset by meteor impacts. So the Cambrian fauna, the Paleozoic fauna, and the Modern fauna, and that's the template of the evolution of multicellular organisms with skeletons, both internal and external, that defines and sculpts the shape of one of the primary three branches of life, which are the Eukarya. 

Moving forward from here, we want to then start to look at the idea that that Eukarya branching history was also interfacing all the time, not only with the changing planet but also with microbes, bacteria and archaea. And one of the great challenges of science is to be able to understand how all these multiple branches of life are developing, and how they interact with each other to influence each other's ability to survive on an ongoing changing planet.

# 4.2 Cambrian Explosion 
Evolutionary biology has played out through geological time in producing brand new organisms that appear on planet Earth. They do very well and expand, and we call that radiate, and then through geological time, eventually these organisms fall away; they don't do well, they go extinct, they stop existing, and that extinction process is the cap on this origination, radiation and extinction cycle that goes on. 

Now, the great origination event when it comes to the metazoans is what we call the Cambrian explosion, and that Cambrian explosion  was a series of organisms that were metazoans, multiple celled, and they grew something really important, that hadn't been on the scene before in terms of evolutionary biology, and that was a skeleton. And the skeletons that were produced by these metazoans were external; they were outside of the body, so we call those invertebrates. The other corollary to this, of course, were the metazoans that grow skeletons that are inside their bodies, and we call those vertebrates, and we're going to save the vertebrates for a little bit later in looking at their evolution. But the first organisms to radiate, originate and expand, were the invertebrates. 

So the Cambrian explosion is marked by this remarkable event of the seafloor suddenly being populated by these relatively large, centimeters-plus in size organisms that grew these exoskeletons. And the skeletons permit the organisms to do a lot of things they can't do without skeletons. One of the things they do is they allow it to have a greater body size. It provides, a physical support within the water and from gravity. It also has advantages in terms of protection from predation. If you're just soft and squishy and you're on the seafloor, something's going to come along and get you, but if you have some kind of a fortress around you called an exoskeleton, then you can ward off your predators, sometimes more easily. The problem is that when predators face exoskeletons, the predators have this bad habit of evolving themselves to have apparatus like jaws and teeth that can crush a skeleton and still devour you, but that's the predator/prey kind of interaction that we see through time. 

Now, another thing that came on board with this Cambrian explosion event was that we know the earth was oxygenated at about 2.5 billion [years ago], but that oxygen level continued to rise, and so by the time we got to the 542-million-year benchmark of the Cambrian explosion, there was much more oxygen, and oxygen is what allows organisms to very efficiently metabolize, and therefore they can drive and develop larger body size, larger mass, and again, this capability of having skeletons. One more aspect of this is that this is all postdating the 0.6 billion-year-old snowball Earth, when the entire earth was covered with ice, and when that ice sheet retreated, actually it went all the way from total ice coverage to no ice at all, and it fluctuated back and forth a bit. That series of events opened up ecospace, and it removed some organisms that were there previously, and allowed other ones to proliferate.

# 4.3 Cambrian Fauna: Origin of Vertebrates 
Now, the Cambrian fauna, it's composed of organisms that we're actually quite familiar with in the modern day things like sponges, a group called cnidarians, and another group of worms. And so I'm going to explain what these are now, but they're actually organisms that almost everybody knows about. 

The first one, the sponges, they're used by people around the world [for] cleaning up a surface; sponges are good to use for that. Now, the original sponges that we use for human applications, they used to be all natural sponges; they were sponges that grew on the seafloor, and, these sponges are quite remarkable because they originated and radiated and developed a very simple body plan that let them take advantage of the hydrological setting they lived in on the seafloor. So what they became were very porous networks of holes that were in a kind of a spongy-like material that was their body mass, and then buried within that were these exoskeletons; in this case they were small flecks called spicules. But what they do is that they grow off the sea floor and they put their holes above the seafloor, and as currents move across the seafloor, the currents actually stick and drag as they touch the seafloor, and therefore as you move up from the seafloor, the lowest part of the seafloor has lower wave velocities and the upper ones have higher wave velocities. So basically, sponges developed to make a tube that ran from the low velocities to the high velocities, and you can run this experiment yourself, if you, if you have water flowing in the bathtub and you make a current in the bottom and you just put a vertical tube into it, it'll automatically passively pump. If there's a differential gradient in the velocity of the water from the bottom to the top, then that water will automatically pump from the bottom upward and out. So the sponges were remarkable engineers. They were able to develop these body plans that took advantage of their place on the seafloor. 

Now this next group, I call them cnidarians, and cnidarians most commonly the ones we know about are things like jellyfish and corals. Cnidarians are a group of metazoans that make exoskeletons that are unified by having a modified cell. Now, this cell is remarkable. It has a very sensitive outer membrane, and it's kind of clustered together within the outer tissue of, in this case, either jellyfish or corals, and if that outer tissue gets brushed by something, let's say it's a fish that they want to prey on, then those cells actually explode, and they release a harpoon. So there's a beautifully crafted harpoon right in the middle of the cell; it comes shooting out of the cell, and the harpoon has prongs on it, so when it goes into whatever it penetrates, it sticks and you can't pull it out. Now, on top of that, that harpoon is actually attached by a tether, a small line that goes back to the cell, and as soon as that harpoon leaves the cell, enters whatever tissue, in this case, let's say it's a fish that they want to eat, enters that tissue, hooks and stays, as soon as the tether gets taught and gets extended, then toxin shoots from the cell through the tether into the harpoon and, depending on how many times it get stung by these cells, it can either slow down or actually kill and paralyze the organism they're trying to eat. So these stinging cells are called nematocysts, and the stinging cells are what unites this group called cnidarians. And again, for our purposes, remembering that they represent jellyfish and corals are fine. 

And then the third group-worms. Again, worms are common in all terrestrial environments almost, especially the ones that we have soils in. These organisms that are long, segmented, and they move by ex-contracting and expanding muscle cells, and they slither through the ground, they like it wet, and they're something that, again, we're pretty familiar with in the modern day. So things like sponges and cnidarians and worms were part of this early explosion of organisms. 

Now, some other ones that then evolved at the same time and then became part of this fauna--again, this grouping of animals that lived, in this case, on the seafloor--were things like brachiopods. Now, brachiopods were first described by Aristotle, and he called them the lamp shells. And a brachiopod has two shells that come together; we call them valves. Each shell is a valve, and those shells come together, and they have a beautiful type of symmetry where if you pass the plane of symmetry between the two valves, then they'll be equivalent on both sides. So they open up, and what we see is that in that in the shell though, instead of having a large mass of tissue that might be eating organic matter in different ways, it has a very feathery structure called a lophophore. And the lophophore within two shells is what defines the group of brachiopods. Brachiopods have a close cousin called bryozoans. They also have this feathery lophophore that's, well it's like a feather that comes out with small tentacles off of it, and it allows them to capture small food particles out of the sea column. And the bryozoans are different, though; instead of having two valves that are together, they live in what looks like a coffin. One of the valves is very large and the other one's very small, and then one valve opens up and they stick out their lophophore and they feed. 

Another group that came on board at that same time that's extremely important to us are the bivalves, the mollusks. And again, these are some of the same ones that we still have in the modern day. These are the classic seashells, where again they have two valves, and then instead of like the brachiopods which have a plane of symmetry that cuts down through the two shells, the two valves, this one has a plane of symmetry that runs along and between the two shells. And so the famous pecten that's used for all kinds of decorations--it's a very famous piece of art--is an example of a bivalve. The kind of clams that people eat to make seafood and make chowder, those are all forms of bivalves. Another group that was present in this time period are the trilobites, and the trilobites are quite unique. They're actually related closely to modern-day insects, and the trilobites were basically an insect-looking organism that cruised around on the seafloor. Some of them lived on the bottom, just directly above the sediment/water interface, and other ones slightly burrowed through the mud, and they were very good at extracting organic matter from those environments. 

Another group that came on at this time are sea urchins, the sea biscuits, the sea urchins, the irregular and regular echinoids. The echinoids mean the spiny-skinned ones. And then the groups that are very unique in terms of going from invertebrate to vertebrate, the tunicates, the sea squirts, those are what we call the hemichordates, the ones that have a type of early backbone only in the embryonic stages, which gets absorbed. So as a juvenile, they're actually more or less a vertebrate, and as an adult they become an invertebrate. Another one of the stars of the Cambrian fauna is an organism that still lives in the modern-day oceans, and where you have an ocean that floods up onto the shoulder of a continent and makes a large inland bay, it's one of the places where these-these organisms like to still live, and they're called horseshoe crabs. So one example in North America is Florida Bay is a place that horseshoe crabs do extremely well. They also live up and down the entirety of the east coast of the US, but they occur any place around the world where you have those right environments. The horseshoe crabs are remarkable. First of all, they're very closely related to the trilobites, and so trilobites went extinct at the end of the Cambrian fauna; that was one of the organisms that did very well and then was outcompeted and the environment changed. So we don't have any modern-day trilobites, but the trilobites that we do have living are an ancestor of the trilobites called the horseshoe crabs. And if you look at the very earliest stages of horseshoe crab development, they look identical to many of the types of trilobites we have in the fossil record. What we see commonly, one of the strategies within evolution is that as time goes on and organisms evolve and become more successful in environments, some of their earlier stages of development, they're actually pushed farther into the history of the life of one organism. So in other words, things that evolve through time, as they change and adapt to environmental constraints and competition and predation, some of the earlier forms of what the organism looked like are actually pushed into the earlier stages of the growth of the individual organisms, and we describe that with a phrase that is "ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny." Ontogeny is the growth history of one single organism. Phylogeny is the history of evolution of all lineages of that organism through time. And so what we see is that ontogeny, the history of the growth of one organism, going from a baby to an adult, what we see is during ontogeny the very earliest stages of phylogeny, which is evolution from an earlier ancestor to later organisms, we see that those natural experiments, in the face of natural selection and other processes that go on, they're actually captured and preserved in that individual organism, but they're only shown and expressed when the organism's very young and very small, and as they grow to be older then they have different morphologies. So the early stages of horseshoe crabs are in that same ilk. Another thing that's critically important about horseshoe crabs is that they're the only metazoan that we know of that had a blood based on copper. So their blood is actually blue. Most organisms like ourselves, we have an iron-based blood system, and the reason that's been successful is it is a very effective means for having iron then react with oxygen, and it's a good way to transport oxygen throughout the internal system of a metazoan. But the blue-blooded horseshoe crabs are ones that have done extremely well in terms of being successful,  but they have this unique history of having a copper-based blood, which turns the blood blue. So the horseshoe crabs are one good example of how we have a living record of ancient organisms that are still alive, if you will, living fossils, but in the history of the development of any one of these living fossils, going from a juvenile into an adult, we have buried within that the record of the earlier stages of evolution and phylogeny that were part of the development of these organisms. So the horseshoe crabs have been around since the Cambrian, but they have actually evolved significantly beyond that, and their earliest ancestors were very closely related to the trilobites. So these organisms that lived on the seafloor dominated and proliferated, and they created these great assemblages of life on the seafloor that we call reefs. And the word "reef", R-E-E-F, is a word that again most people know, but it's very poorly known how to define it by most people. And the idea there is that a reef is a structure on the seafloor, or it could be a lake floor but in this case it's a sea floor, is a structure on the seafloor that is stuck together and rigid, and it can resist waves. In other words, when waves come along, if there's a bump on the seafloor, that bump is resistant enough to push back and not be pulverized and spread out by the waves. Now the word "reef", then, can be a group of organisms on the seafloor, but it can also be a rock, a group of rocks on the seafloor. And this word "reef" was actually derived from the Norse word "rif," R-I-F, and it means the human rib. And so a coral reef is a group of corals, along with some of the other organisms we've talked about the brachiopods and the bivalves and the clams and snails and all these other groups that are living on the seafloor. So the whole notion of having a group of animals get together and create a community on the seafloor, and when they live and conduct their everyday life together in these assemblages--again, they're invertebrates, and because they have an exoskeleton, their skeletons all accumulate in place, and it makes an accumulation of rock, and that accumulation of rock, based on these exoskeletons, is wave-resistant and it sticks off the seafloor. So the idea of communities on the seafloor when corals were dominant, we call these coral reefs, and when brachiopods are dominant we call them brachiopod bryozoan bivalve reefs. Whatever makes up the major part of the community living on the seafloor, that's what we use as their name. So the Cambrian fauna was the initiation and the introduction to the seafloor of these invertebrates that would live in communities, create these accumulations, and then these accumulations through time become fossilized. And so these fossilized reef communities provided us with a dramatically detailed record of the ecology of what was happening on the seafloor. And again, the thinking here is that these communities of the Cambrian fauna that were developing these reef organizational entities on the seafloor, that they then ended up setting the template for the early oceans within the Paleozoic. Now, there were a whole series of other events that took place, things like meteor impacts. We had additional formation of ice; we had other events--volcanic eruptions that took place in that early Paleozoic, the Cambrian, the Ordovician, the Silurian, and then into the Devonian. So as an accumulation of all these events together with the ongoing exchange going from some organisms originating, radiating, evolving, and then going extinct, that Cambrian community did well, but more or less went extinct by about the time of the Devonian. Some of them got through, but others did not. So that Cambrian fauna set the stage for seafloor ecology, and some of these strategies then were used by different organisms that replaced them through geological time.

# 4.4 Burgess Shale Experiment 
The Burgess shale fauna is an example of another experiment that was run during the course of evolutionary biology, where nature selected for and provided the constraints and the environmental setting and the ecological foundations for the evolution of a new type of organism. The Burgess shale is named after an outcrop of rock that occurs in the Rocky Mountains of Canada, and the Burgess shale itself was deposited in marine environments, shallow ocean deposits. They're very fine-grained, so it would have been a muddy, relatively moderately shallow water depth, and these were organisms that lived on the seafloor and did very well in this Cambrian time period. Now, we have an example of another  evolutionary  experiment that took place with the Ediacaran fauna, and that also did extremely well on a global scale, and then went completely extinct soon after it originated. This is another example, then. And so the Burgess shale fauna has provided us with an amazing assortment of organisms. We see, first of all, crabs that look like some kind of an alien type of life-form. These crabs had these large spine-like projections that came around from the head, and then it protected a whole series of segments that made up the body, going back into the tail. So it had all these multiple parts that were moving forward. Some of these were swimmers, and a lot of them were benthic dwellers that lived on the seafloor and were able to crawl and move forward. As one example we had crabs that were part of this assemblage, and because they are so intricate, we call them a lace crab. Another completely bizarre organism, again, we have nothing like this right now, we call it hallucigenia. And hallucigenia looked like a centipede with extremely long legs that had gigantic spikes coming off of it, and it's appropriately named, because you try to describe this to someone and they'd assume that you were hallucinating. Again, we have nothing like this on the modern-day seafloor, with all these multiple appendages and legs that allowed them to move forward, and then this very elaborate system for, we assume protecting them from predation. We also had a group of maybe less dramatic organisms that lived both on the seafloor and up in the water column, and they made lifestyle success in ways that we'd seen previously with some of the other organisms that came up in the Cambrian. But these Burgess shale fauna are explicitly different from any of the other ones we saw before. Another one of the ideas of the Burgess shale is that we have a group of predators that did extremely well, and again that probably because the predators were so successful helped lead to the demise of these organisms. And one of the major types of predators, again, it's just absolutely bizarre, we call it opabinia. And opabinia looked like some kind of a combination of, if you will, some kind of maybe floating crab, but then it had a very insect-like head, and then coming out from the front of the head it had one long projected appendage that had a big claw on the front, and that claw would move the prey that it attacked and devoured into its mouth. So, again, the group of the Burgess shale is really important. Now, all the factors that came into playing for the Burgess shale, again, it's in the same group of looking at the origination, radiation, and extinction eventually of organisms there were changes in the ecosystem that then began to allow opening of different parts of the ecosystem to new types of organisms. These organisms came in quickly, they started evolving and radiating very successfully, and then they drop off. And the drop-off was, again, some kind of combination between predation, environmental change, and other factors that took place in the environment. The important thing for us is that it's the second example of nature running a very explicit and specific experiment, creating organisms that hadn't been seen before or seen again. They were successful for a very short period of time, and then therefore they went extinct. But the Cambrian fauna includes this group of the Burgess shale fauna. And again, towards the end of that time period, as we move from the Cambrian into the Ordovician, and then eventually into the Devonian, we see that all these faunas dropped off simultaneously, and they were probably all affected, then, by this same suite that included biological pressures on them, competition and predation, reproductive strategies, other things that they had been evolving and trying to use in the environment, along with changes in the environment in which they were living, like the chemistries that were present, the ocean water flows, if there were volcanic events, if there were ice sheets that were forming, and of course our old friend the meteor impacts, always possible that these would come in randomly at different times to reset the stage of evolution on the seafloor at any given time.

# 4.5 Invertebrates: Successes of Life Without a Backbone
I'm Carly Miller at the University of Illinois, and today we're discussing invertebrate diversity, or the different invertebrate phyla. So remember, an invertebrate is an organism that is lacking a backbone. And later we will contrast that to the subphylum Vertebrata, which definitely has a backbone. So we're going to go through step by step the different phyla of invertebrates, and what we want to identify is specific features that you can tie back to a specific phylum. And so we're going to go through symmetry, the modes of life, the feeding modes, as well as any particularly special characteristics that that particular phylum exhibits. 
So we're going to start with a very basic organism in the phylum Porifera. So you may recognize Porifera as sponges. So sponges, again, these are all going to be, or most of them will be marine organisms, and then so we're going to start with sponges. So again, these organisms are asymmetrical, some of them can be radial. Their mode of life is that they're encrusters, meaning they grow on surfaces, they grow on other organisms sometimes even. They're epifaunal, meaning they're on the seafloor, not within the seafloor, and they're sessile. So I don't know if you've ever seen a sponge move, but I have not. And so that means that they're sessile. Their feeding mode, because they're sessile, they have to be filter feeders, more or less. So Porifera, the phylum Porifera, they are all filter feeders, and there's one exception that is carnivorous. The cellular structure of the phylum Porifera is that they don't really have any true tissues by definition. So they are composed of cells, but not a tissue, which is a very specific organization of those cells. Lastly, a piece of great information is that a group of sponges is called a sleaze. I've never heard that before, but pretty interesting. 
The next phylum we'd like to consider is the phylum Cnidaria. So this is composed of corals, anemones and jellyfish. So if you're thinking about a jellyfish that you may have seen, or a coral that you've snorkeled over, what you might notice is that they are radially symmetrical. The mode of life is epifaunal and sessile. So again, corals are going to grow on the seafloor and they're not going to move anywhere. So there are a few vagrant cnidarians, but most of them are pelagic and planktonic. So remember, that means they're kind of floating with the currents in the ocean. So a jellyfish, it's radially symmetrical, it's not going in a particular direction, but it does move. So the phylum Cnidaria, they are composed of carnivores, so they are vagrant, and they actually are passive carnivores, meaning they can't hunt in a particular direction or a particular food source, but they do eat live prey. And how they do that is they use stinging cells called cnidoblasts, and those are usually activated mechanically or by touch, so that's why, other than preserving corals, you're not supposed to touch them, is that they actually can sting you, and I'm sure you've heard of jellyfish actually being quite dangerous or deadly to humans because of these cnidoblast cells. And so they're able to stun their prey and then ingest them. Corals have stony skeletons, and so they are well-preserved in the fossil record. They have a thin layer of soft parts, but we have a great bulky skeleton that is well-preserved in the fossil record. Additionally, organisms in the phylum Cnidaria can be solitary or they can be colonial organisms. So the functional unit of a colony is just one individual organism, but each organism is then either genetically identical or very similar to its neighbor, and so those are put together in an assemblage called a colony. 
Moving onto a much less dangerous phylum, this is the phylum Bryozoa. They're similar to a sponge, maybe in structure, but they're definitely within their own group. And so these guys are mostly asymmetrical. They're benthic, epifaunal and sessile, so they're not going to be moving. And we do have a couple of great fossils of different parts of the Bryozoa, not necessarily a full complete fossil of a bryozoan, because they're rather delicate, actually. So here, you can see a stem, if you will, or one of the more robust parts of a bryozoan organism. Additionally, because we've mentioned that bryozoans are epifaunal and sessile, again, meaning they're not going to move along that seafloor, they are again going to be filter feeders. The phylum Bryozoa, they have a specific feature called the lophophore, and they use this lophophore to filter feed, and that's just a specific structure that specifically the bryozoans use. 
The next phylum we'd like to consider is Brachiopoda. Again, these are your brachiopods, and they are widely distributed in the fossil record. They're well-preserved, often. But there're several different shapes of brachiopods, and I'll show you some examples that you can identify them. A couple of the main features of this phylum is that their feeding mode is that they're filter feeders, because again, we've identified that they're benthic, epifaunal and sessile, meaning they're not moving, and these particular organisms are not colonial. Brachiopods are similar to bryozoans in that they also use a lophophore. So this particular structure is specific to the phylum Brachiopoda and the phylum Bryozoa. Brachiopods attach to the seafloor using a pedicle, which is a fleshy appendage that comes out the back of the shell and sticks to the seafloor, and they can use that pedicle for attachment. Brachiopods also have a calcium carbonate exoskeleton, so their shells are composed of calcium carbonate. And what we want to note about the phylum Brachiopoda is that they're one of the most successful organisms in the Paleozoic era. 
Alright, lastly we want to consider the symmetry of brachiopods, because it's specific to this phylum. So the symmetry of these organisms is that it's bilateral symmetry, but it's perpendicular to the plane of commissure. The plane of commissure is the surface, or the plane, where two shells come together. For example, on this bivalve, you can see that there's a top shell and there's a bottom shell, and there's a plane that separates the two shells, and that plane is called the plane of commissure. So with brachiopods, they too have a top shell and bottom shell and a plane of commissure, but their symmetry is such that it's not the same on the top and the bottom, but it's actually on the same from right to left, so we call that perpendicular to this plane. 
So moving forward, the next phylum we'd like to consider is phylum Mollusca. And so this is a diverse phyla of shelled organisms or formerly-shelled organisms, and we've divided this phylum into many classes, but we'd like to focus in on three particular classes, the class Bivalvia, the class Gastropoda, and the class Cephalopoda. So the first class in phylum Mollusca that we'd like to consider is the class Bivalvia. So these are clams, mussels, oysters and scallops, for example. Their symmetry is bilateral symmetry, but it's parallel to the plane of commissure. So this is, again, in contrast to the brachiopods, which had symmetry perpendicular to that plane. So just to demonstrate that symmetry, we have a top shell and a bottom shell, and we have our plane of commissure, which is that plane where those two shells meet. And again, you can see here, on this bivalve, that the top and the bottom are mirror images of each other, and so the symmetry is along that plane, and that's parallel to the plane of commissure. The mode of life of bivalves is epifaunal, but they can also be infaunal, meaning they have the capability to bury themselves or survive on the seafloor. The feeding mode of the class Bivalvia is filter feeders, and they use a siphon to filter the sea water. And it's similar to the structure of a lophophore, found in bryozoans and brachiopods, but a little bit different and is called a siphon and is specific to the class Bivalvia. And just one note here.  So we talked about the symmetry being bilateral in general, and parallel to the plane of commissure in this class, but oysters and scallops in particular are generally asymmetrical actually, so we want to look out for that. 
The second class that we'd like to consider in the phylum Mollusca is the class Gastropoda, or your gastropods. So these are snails, slugs, and they can be very diverse as far as the level of species goes. The symmetry of gastropods is that they're asymmetrical shells, and they have bilaterally symmetrical bodies, actually. The mode of life of the class Gastropoda is that they're epifaunal, so they live on the seafloor, and they're vagrant, so they move. So if you think of a snail or a slug, you know that those are moving around, and you can think of a slug as an example of a bilaterally symmetrical body, so that's a good example, you could picture that in your mind maybe what a slug looks like, splitting it into right and left halves. And a snail is basically a slug with a shell, and so you can picture how the shell is maybe asymmetrical, but the organism that lived there, or the soft parts, are bilaterally symmetrical. And the feeding mode is interesting with the class Gastropoda because all feeding modes are represented, including carnivores, so look out for those slugs. 
The third class in the phylum Mollusca is class Cephalopoda, or your cephalopods. This includes squid, octopi, ammonoids, and nautiloids, and many can be extremely large. The symmetry of cephalopods is that they're bilaterally symmetrical, with their bodies and their shells. Their mode of life, if you can think of the squid, it's nektonic, which meaning it's moving in a particular direction in the water column. If you think of octopi, they're actually going to be benthic, but obviously vagrant; they do move around, and they are active predators, so stay away. Observe closely, but stay away. So if they're active predators, then their feeding mode is that they are carnivorous. Some cephalopods exhibit a single piece of a coiled shell, such as this nautilus, and they have a siphuncle in them, a siphuncle, which is a tube that brings in water to the shell and controls the buoyancy of it in the water column, meaning it controls the position of the organism in the water column. And an interesting note about cephalopods is that they generally have above-average intelligence. So again, these are invertebrates, they're mollusks, and they are highly intelligent, and this is correlated to, actually, very good eyesight, and they're very fast movers. So I would beware of the class Cephalopoda. 
Alright, moving to another phylum of invertebrates, we want to consider Arthropods, so the phylum Arthropoda. These are insects, trilobites, which are extinct, crabs, barnacles, spiders, scorpions, and lobsters, mmm-add a little butter there, right? Arthropods are the most successful and diverse,  and numerous organisms in one phylum. So that's something to consider; you want to note that this is a very diverse diverse phylum. Their symmetry is bilateral, though, so that's a specific symmetry, so even though this phylum is very diverse, you have a lot of radiation there, a high number of organisms included in this phylum, they all are bilaterally symmetrical. So we can gather some information from that symmetry again. But the mode of life in the phylum Arthropoda is they can basically be anything, and if you were paying attention to the list of examples, insects, trilobites, crabs, lobsters, scorpions, you'll see that they're representing marine organisms, freshwater organisms and terrestrial organisms, so a very diverse group here. Their feeding mode, again, across the board. Something you want to consider, if you've identified an organism as an arthropod, is that you need to pay very close attention to the shape, the structure, the functional morphology of that organism so that you can start to hypothesize what this organism ate and how it lived. So one of the key characteristics of an arthropod is that it has a chitinous exoskeleton, so a skeleton on the outside of the organism, and it's divided into segments, which is usually where humans get a little weirded out. So here we have an example of an arthropod, and this is a trilobite. Again, these are extinct, but you can clearly see it has segments where each of those body parts are almost identical, if not identical to the one before it, so it's a segmented organism, and that's specific to arthropods. And again, this trilobite fossil is actually a great one because it also exhibits the bilateral symmetry that the phylum exhibits. The last phylum we'd like to consider, of invertebrates, is called Echinodermata. So this is represented by sea stars, brittle stars, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, sand dollars, echinoids, and crinoids. So their symmetry is pentameral symmetry, with some exceptions, and they have a calcium carbonate endoskeleton, meaning inside their bodies, so they're covered by a soft layer of tissue on the outside. There's two classes we'd like to consider within the phylum Echinodermata: Crinoidea and Echinoidea. 
The first class is Crinoidea, and this is represented by sea lilies and crinoids, hence the name. Living crinoids are generally un-stalked, meaning they don't have the long stem, a segmented stem coming up to almost kind of like a flowery shape. I think these are like sea lilies basically. But so living crinoids are generally un-stalked, but there have been reports in deep water that there are some stalked crinoids still living today, which is unusual. Extinct crinoids were all, almost by rule, all stalked. So if you had a chance to play in your playground as a child and you had a gravel bottom to your playground, you might have found something like this, which looks like a segmented little peg, if you will. And I used to find these in my local playground, and I never knew what they were, and here I am a geologist, and I find out that these are crinoid stems actually. And so they could be several feet in length, and they have easily observable segments. And something you want to be aware of when you're considering a crinoid stalk is that upon first glance, they actually look radially symmetrical, right? They're almost a perfect column or a cylinder, but if you look closer, you actually see that in the middle of the column there's a star, or it looks like a star. And so if you were to count the points on the star, there's five, and so that actually then knocks it into the pentamerally symmetrical structure. So crinoids are benthic, epifaunal organisms, and they're sessile. So if you can think about having a stalk, that's not the same as a leg, right? It's more like a stem, and so that organism is going to be rooted to the seafloor. So it's going to be benthic and epifaunal and sessile. And because they're sessile, they're again going to be filter feeders. 
The second class in Echinodermata is Echinoidea, and there's regular echinoids and irregular echinoids. Regular echinoids are sea urchins, and they're epifaunal, they're vagrant herbivores, they scrape algae off the rocks with something called an Aristotle's lantern, which we'll look at in closer detail. And regular echinoids have long spines actually, so that's a key feature of those particular sea urchins. An irregular echinoid is actually what you might call a sand dollar. So if you think about a sand dollar, they're actually rather flat, they're smooth, generally, in structure, and they have actually been reduced to having tiny spines as opposed to long spines with the regular echinoids. So these irregular echinoids have greatly reduced spines. They're still vagrant, but since they're smoother, they can actually become infaunal, and they can bury themselves in the ground. So we have regular echinoids, which are epifaunal, and we have irregular echinoids, smoother, which are smoother, and they're infaunal. Additionally, irregular echinoids are detrital feeders, meaning they mix up the sediment and they actually eat the vitamins and the nutrients that are buried within the sediment, and the regular echinoids are herbivores. So here we've considered a diverse group of invertebrates. We've gotten very specific with the characteristics that are exhibited within each phylum. The important thing about what we've discussed is that you can deduce most of that information from looking at a specimen that you find, and so we can deduce a lot of information from the symmetry, the shape of the organism, and those are very specific, and so if you can identify those features, you can actually place this organism taxonomically into a very particular phylum.

#4.6 Paleozoic Fauna
The second great fauna that we have seen arise in the geological record as a result of evolutionary biology experiments through time is called the Paleozoic fauna. The Paleozoic fauna replaced and came on board after the Cambrian fauna. It started really doing fairly well in the Ordovician, and there was overlap between the end of the Cambrian fauna and then the beginning of the Paleozoic fauna. And the reason for that overlap is some of the organisms are very similar. They're in the same group of seafloor organisms that were invertebrates, the corals and the bivalves and the trilobites. All these organisms were coexisting at the same time, but then the Cambrian fauna, we saw a replacement of some of these with other related organisms. So the Paleozoic fauna rose in the Ordovician and then really zenithed and did extremely well through the run of the Devonian, the Mississippian and the Pennsylvanian time periods, going into the Permian. And they continued doing well until a natural disaster took place at the end of the Permian. A major meteor hit the planet, caused about 85% of everything living in both the oceans and on land to go extinct, and that 85% drop, then, in the diversity of life on the planet is shown in the fossil record. And again, remember kind of the invisible guiding hand behind the structure of how we understand geological time to have been parsed out through the millennia, is the idea that a lot of geological time in the Phanerozoic is based on the radiation and then extinction of fossils. So the Paleozoic fauna is the second of the great faunas, and we're going to see that there were organisms that were similar to us and organisms that were not. One of the advents of the Paleozoic fauna is the idea that plants actually began to take hold and radiate and evolve on the land surface. So we had some plants in the oceans, algae and other forms of plants, but then, especially in the Ordovician we see the first example of plants leaving the seawater environment and then going into the terrestrial land environment. So we got a small foothold in the Ordovician. And some of these early plants, they were very simple in their structure; they had a very rudimentar root system, and the root system actually gave them stability and the ability to pump water and move water and actually hold water, because moving from the ocean into the land means that you're able to store water and carry it with you so you don't dehydrate. Another thing that happens is that you're able to solve the riddle of how to reproduce without water. When you're in water, reproduction has lower hurdles of difficulty than if you live in the land environment. There's multiple things--the ability to gain food and other types of nutrient sources. But the invasion of the land happened with the plants that marked the beginning of the Paleozoic fauna. Now, some of these early plants, they looked a lot like ferns, or they looked almost like, you know, small types of tropical trees that we can think of. They had various shapes, but they were very bushy and fern-like, and they started to colonize this land environment. Now, in terms of the geological response to this colonization, we saw that river system before we had plants, rivers could just flow and meander and cut through landscapes unconstrained. It was just based on how much water there was and then the ability to cut and to mold the landscape. As soon as plants came onboard, we saw fundamentally that the ability of river systems to erode is constrained by plants. We see all the time in the modern-day environment plants living along the edge of river systems and on levies, and those plant root systems, you know, bind the soil, and they actually attenuate and control and determine some of the erosion that goes on. So the whole dynamic of eroding a natural landscape was altered by the invasion of the land plants. Now, another thing that is accompanied in the Paleozoic with the advent of the land plants is that provides a major source of food. So we see that a gigantic food source became available, and of course the way nature responds, the way evolutionary biology responds to a new food source is new things evolve to eat that food source. So the land plants provided food, and then we had another major explosion, then in the organisms that could live on land as well as in the sea. So everything changed. Now, at that same time period then, as we were having the evolution of the fish in the seawater then we started having fish that develop capabilities to come on land, and we'll be seeing this evolution from fish, then, eventually into amphibians, the ones that can live both in and out of the water, then eventually into the reptiles, and we'll see how the great radiation of the three groupings of reptiles, one of which we've evolved from, all came about because of the proliferation of the food source in these land-based environments. Now, one of the things that we need to remember is globally, every place has fossils. Every country on the planet has got fossils, and every country on the planet has got a template or a basic suite of basic rock types that everyone runs around on and ignores on a daily basis. But something that's really important to recognize in the course of evolutionary biology is that these great discoveries have happened all over the planet, and when these discoveries take place it's very common for people to name the fossils after the geographic locations in which the fossils were found, and we'll see this occurring over and over again through time. Well, in this Paleozoic fauna as we had this whole succession of fish into amphibians, into reptiles, and then the land plant blossom, we also had the emergence of the insects. And some of the insects that we know of, the dragonflies and the butterflies, flies themselves, all kinds of organisms that are very, very diverse, all did very well in that Paleozoic fauna, and again, it's all related directly to the relationship of the insects to the diversification of the different types of plants. And one of the most striking fossil assemblages we have on planet Earth for this time period actually takes place here in the state of Illinois, and we have a very unique kind of fossil that we find, and it indeed it's the state fossil. Every country, every state, every place, depending on what fossils are abundant there, they name one of those fossils a state or a country fossil. The state of Illinois, the fossil here is called a Tully Monster, and a Tully Monster looks something like a segmented worm that has some jaws on the end with a mouth, and it's very bizarre-looking because it had a very small mouth and jaw system, and then had a very long neck, and then it kind of inflated out to be a segmented worm-like central body that had a bit of a flipper on the end. So the Tully Monster is a weirdo, but it's extremely common in the State of Illinois, and the reason it's common is that during the Paleozoic, one of the time periods of that is called the Pennsylvanian. When you're in Europe and other places, the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian are combined into a time period they call the Carboniferous, and the Carboniferous is the great age of the coals. And so the Carboniferous in Europe was split into two divisions; the earlier one's called Mississippian, and the later one is called the Pennsylvanian here in the United States. And so, this great time period of the age of coals, the coals were formed from having incredibly well-developed forests that grew out into marshy areas, and it was also a time period of having the oceans be relatively high because we had little to no ice on the planet, so all the ice that's normally bound up in the oceans released back into the water, and sea level becomes very high. So all the conditions were right to have a lot of organic matter deposited quickly along the margins of the oceans, and especially in deltaic systems and marsh systems that were right on the borderline between the coastal regions of the world. So these very thick coal deposits were very important at that time period, and in coal swamps you have a suite of environmental constraints that are just right to preserve very fragile organisms if they die and fall into the water. And these waters are very low in oxygen, and because they're low in oxygen, then they have a unique suite of microbes that live in the waters, and then you have the ability to have very high rates of sedimentation, very quick burial of something that dies and falls into the water. So the coal swamps are a great place to make fossils. The Tully Monster is an example of that. The Tully Monsters lived in these coal swamps, and when they died and their bodies hit the bottom of the swamp, before they could be eaten by something else, it wasn't uncommon for them to be buried very quickly, and they were buried in environments where the oxygen levels were very low, and it allowed to have this very unique, beautiful, perfect preservation of the organism. Now, another reason that it gets preserved is in these swampy, muddy environments. As the organism dies its tissue breaks down and releases different chemicals, and some of these are organic acids and some of them, they're just a whole suite of different chemicals that come out. And those chemicals radiate away from the body concentrically, so they start at the body that's decaying and then moves out, and so we see these chemical reactions that go from where the actual organism has died and is in the sediments, and moves out away, and those chemical reactions actually make the sediments transition chemically into becoming a solid rock. And so the solid rocks that we have that preserve these, we call them concretions. They look like small eggs, but they're kind of flattened, and so these flattened egg-like structures are very common in coal swamp areas around the world, and again, especially here in the state of Illinois. If you take those concretions and you put them outside in the wintertime and then put them outside in the summertime, let them heat up to high temperatures naturally in the Summer, freeze down to cold temperatures in the winter, they'll actually naturally crack open, and they'll crack open along the flat part of the flattened egg, and it pops into two pieces, and you open it up and inside is a beautifully-preserved organism. One of them is the Tully Monster. But other things that lived in the coal swamps were also preserved in this fashion. So the concretions have given us a fantastic fossil record of butterflies, where individual patterns and beautiful shapes of the scales on the leaves, they're all perfectly preserved down to a single cell level. We have plant material that looks like it was growing yesterday, perfectly preserved in this, and another great example is the Tully Monster. So the Paleozoic was diversification at a level that the planet hadn't seen before. It involved not only the invertebrates but then the simultaneous evolution of the vertebrates, and it included great success in marine environments, but then full-on invasion of the terrestrial land environments, and those are the characteristics of the Paleozoic fauna.

# 4.7 Vertebrates: Successes of Life With a Backbone
I'm Carly Miller at the University of Illinois, and the topic of discussion today is the phylum Chordata and the subphylum Vertebrata, of which you are a member. So you are a vertebrate, and we will be discussing the specific characteristics that define this phylum and this subphylum. And the reason why we would like to go into depth with this is because we are kind of marching through geologic time and we're observing that organisms are getting more and more complex, more organized, and generally more sophisticated. So there are three common characteristics that the phylum Chordata exhibits during their ontogeny, which is development from the embryological stage through adulthood. And the first of those common characteristics is the presence of a hollow dorsal neural tube, and what that is is it basically comprises your spinal cord and your brain, so your central nervous system. Secondly, there is the presence of a notochord, which again, that's just some kind of axial support going usually up the dorsal side of an organism, so it's providing support for that organism's body. Lastly, it will exhibit gill slits, which is a way of drawing in oxygen from your environment, and even you have exhibited gill slits at some point during your embryological stages. So that is the third common characteristic that an organism in the phylum Chordata will exhibit. So if we're going down in taxonomical hierarchy, we're now in the subphylum Vertebrata, which is a member of the phylum Chordata. And these organisms also exhibit certain characteristics, and the kind of the primary one that distinguishes a vertebrate from an invertebrate, for example, is that the notochord, which, again, provides that axial support is surrounded or replaced by vertebrae. So those vertebrae can be actually composed of a softer cartilage material or hard bone, and so that's actually important to consider because if we think back to how an organism is preserved in the rock record, those soft versus hard parts could introduce a bias in the fossil record. So an organism with a cartilaginous vertebra, or vertebral column, may not be as well or as accurately represented in the rock record as a really robust, hard skeleton would be represented. So what we need to consider, moving forward when thinking about the organisms as they emerge and radiate through geologic time is that any organism in the subphylum vertebrata will exhibit these features. And so that's just something that we want to keep in mind, if we're thinking about fish to tetrapods to amphibians to mammals, dinosaurs and all the way up through modern-day humans.

# 4.8 Evolution of Jaws and Perfecting Predation
The first true vertebrates were fish, the organisms that had a bone inside their body mass, and they attach muscles to it so they can do things that were very useful, like move. So the original invertebrates had what we call sessile, or non-moving, lifestyle on the seafloor. So the advent of moving on the seafloor was tremendously helpful for these organisms. So we started off with a tunicate, with an early embryonic vertebrate that was resorbed, and then we moved into this fishlike, early fishlike organism that we call a conodont, which we have very little of the skeleton preserved, but we have a lot of the teeth preserved, and these conodonts make for the perfect biostratographic fossil that's used throughout that Cambrian fauna for the Cambrian and Ordovician and Silurian time periods. But then the question is "What's the next step," going from this kind of proto-fish called the conodont into true fish? So the first true fish were organisms that had no jaw. They were fish-like; if you saw them, they looked fish-like. They had head, tail, fins, but they had no jaw, so their heads were different too because, with no jaw, that means you have to have a permanent opening, a mouth, and that mouth has to be open all the time, because you can't close it and shut it. So it's kind of like a small torpedo with a big open end, and its strategy was to move forward and either shove the mouth into sediment or shove the mouth toward something it wanted to prey on, and then lined inside of that open mouth all the time were these little hooks, kind of early types of teeth, and that way whatever got inside couldn't be released and get out. So it was a different kind of body plan than we think of for the normal fish. The other thing is that the musculature and the ability to swim, which is being evolved early on in these organisms, so they took a different strategy. They decide to go into ultra-defensive mode, and they built a fortress. In other words, they made a skeleton that was on the outside as well the inside, so we call it armory. These were vertebrates, again, with a backbone and the chevron muscles, but they created helmets around them that were fused-together scales. So basically, they were armored. They were like a small tank with an opening that was permanently available at the front end of the tank, and they would just move through the water. Now, their musculature and their fins were very poorly-developed, so they were also awkward, poor swimmers, and then this armored head, and sometimes the entire body was armored, made for a very awkward and slow-moving machine in the water masses at these time periods. Now, another thing that had happened at this advent of the jawless fish was that they transitioned into creating skeletons that had a lot of phosphate, so they were phosphatic skeletons. Phosphatic skeletons are still the type of mineral that modern-day fish use. In many places around the world, fish bones are ground up and then spread across fields as a fertilizer because phosphate is a great fertilizer. So, it's something that we still utilize all the time, but the beginning of having a phosphatic skeleton took place in this Cambrian-Ordovician transition, and the jawless fish were the first ones that had that. And as you can see from some of these images of the jawless fish in reconstructions, they were quite unique and it was a body plan that was effective for defense and apparently just enough so they could get the food they wanted, but it wasn't an overly effective type of approach, and as the armored heads and shields of the fish were evolved through time, as you can see here, some of them developed these huge points at the front end of the mouth area, and the mouth would modify and move down and make kind of a slit so it wasn't just a big open cave at the front of the head. And you can see in this lower picture here that you almost got this grimace, you had these really grotesque-looking smiles that were developed by having the ornamentation around the lower part of the shield of the fish. And then the eyes were actually sunken into the shield, so they were out-looking out through a shield, so, actually quite terrifying-looking organisms that were starting to evolve. Now, the next step of course in the process is that we want to be able to have jaws, and the jaw evolution story is the following, that one of the things that defines fish is that they have a gill, and the gill is an apparatus that's evolved that's very good at extracting oxygen that's dissolved in water. So water passes along the gills, and then the gills have multiple, very intricate, highly fluted surfaces that allow the oxygen to be taken out of the water and then utilized by the organism. Now, of course we have lungs, and lungs we don't fill with water, right, so we fill them with air and then we extract the oxygen from that, so it's a very different process, but in these early organisms, the gill was the mechanism to get oxygen. So all the jawless fish had gills, and there is a lot of fossil evidence, as we can see from this diagram, that the gill structures themselves and the bone apparatus that was developed to support the gills, so the gill supports that those eventually through time, they evolved to become more efficient to get more oxygen out of the water, and as they became more efficient, the thinking is became larger and more robust, and they ac-actually moved position in the structure of the fish. So they were moving, getting larger, and finally they fused together. So we think that the earliest jaws were a series of gill structures that ended up getting larger, moving slightly forward in the head, and then becoming fused, and then eventually those fused gill structures provided support, musculature started to develop along the gill structures, and then that's what allowed the final development of a true functioning jaw. So the ability to have a jaw revolutionized fish completely, and we call the Devonian time period the "Age of Fish," because that evolutionary development reached its zenith in terms of actually having finally a true functioning jaw in that Devonian time period. Now, there's one more step here we need to think about at that same time of going from gill supports that fuse, and then musculature attaches and then we actually form a true functioning jaw, and that is a process that's biochemical, and we call it anaerobic glycolysis. It sounds like a difficult series of chemical concepts, but it's actually pretty straightforward, and I can tell you that all of us practice this every single day of our lives. So if you're an organism that uses muscles, which is us and many other types of metazoans, every time you use your muscles, every time you go through muscular activity, your muscles consume oxygen, and they consume oxygen because, in the process of using your muscles, you break down sugars, and so you metabolize the sugars in your muscles using oxygen. So the problem is that when you are at a stage of using your muscles when you have plenty of oxygen available, then the process moves forward quite easily, but then oxygen that's available within your musculature that is delivered by the blood is reduced dramatically locally as soon as you start moving. So muscle use means that you consume the oxygen. Well what happens is as soon as you get to an oxygen deficit, as soon as you start using up a lot of the oxygen and you're, again, breaking down the sugars, one of the byproducts of that metabolic process, in this case is the production of acid. So in other words, the pH, the relative acidity of the solutions that are bathing your muscles, as you go through an oxygen deficit, the acidity drops. And we all do this, because the blood system cannot provide an infinite supply of oxygen to your muscles. So what happens is that we use our muscles, we consume oxygen, we consume the sugars and then we make the local environment acidic. Now, when the local environment becomes acidic, remember what the muscles are attached to; they're attached to the bone. So if the muscles were attached to a bone that was made out of calcium carbonate, CaCO_3, if you add a little bit of acid to calcium carbonate it dissolves. So it's not a good strategy to have a muscle/skeleton system where as soon as you use these robust muscles you dissolve your own skeleton. That's the ultimate negative feedback. So what was adapted during evolutionary biology was that the fish transition from a more calcitic skeleton, which is very sensitive to a small drop in pH, to a phosphatic skeleton, which is much less sensitive to a drop in pH. So, the phosphatic skeleton, and ours has been modified into a more apatite-rich skeleton, which is another form of a resistant skeleton to these drops in acidity, it didn't solve the problem of oxygen deficit. In fact, that's one of the reasons we get tired when we exercise or play sports is that we are constantly going through an oxygen deficit using the muscles, and exercise allows you to build up your muscles to reduce the effects of the oxygen deficit. But the really important thing was that evolutionary biology provided us with a phosphatic skeleton in the fish, and therefore, by having their everyday normal activities, they weren't dissolving their own bone structure. So that was fundamental, and that was as important as the development of the jaws. So suddenly then we had the ultimate predator, we had an organism that had advanced muscle systems, fins had developed, it had lost a lot of the outer armoring. Now, one of the biggest fish that we know of in the fossil record is an organism called a placoderm, and that placoderm, as we can see from this image, was huge. The jaw is on the order of a meter high, if not more, and then a couple meters in length. So if you stood in front of this basically one good bite is your entire body. So the placoderms were quite phenomenal, and one way to think about the scale of a placoderm was, here's a good image of a placoderm hunting a shark. Now, sharks came onboard at that time period, and they have a different kind of musculature, and also a different kind of bone structure, but the important thing in this context is that the placoderms were an alpha predator in the oceans of the Devonian, and they were immense; they were on the order of 20, 30 meters in length. One of the jokes I always make is that we're very lucky as humans that we evolved when we did. There's been many large predators in the world's oceans, but having large, predatory placoderms would have prevented basically all ocean water sports, so swimming and sailing and scuba diving, these would have all been activities that would have been virtually impossible because of the high rate of predation that would be done by the placoderms. And you can see in this image that the placoderms finding snacks, its next lunch target is a gigantic shark. So the placoderms were serious predators, and they rose quickly because of their musculature, their phosphatic skeleton, and this incredible jaw system. And the thing about the placoderms that I think is especially interesting, too, is that they kept this very, very well-armored skull that we see, and so they had the predatory capabilities, but these really strong defense capabilities. So this sequence of evolutionary events, then, brought us to the moment, then, of having a fully-orchestrated group of predatory organisms called fish, and that restructured fundamentally, then the communities of animals and plants that were living on the ocean floor and set the stage, then, for the transition from the Cambrian fauna then into the Paleozoic fauna. And part of that transition was going from the more rudimentary jawless fish, then directly into the jawed fish, and by introducing a predator that was so capable at these time periods, predatory pressure actually drives evolution and diversification, just like we saw ice sheets, just like we saw meteor impacts. So, evolving and establishing predators is another major event in an ecosystem evolving forward.

# 4.9 Heavily Armored Fish Without Jaws
I'm Carly Miller from the University of Illinois, and today we're talking about fish! Alright! So to get a little taxonomical, we're in the phylum Chordata and the subphylum Vertebrata. Alright, so most people probably have an idea of what that is, but we have a few technical definitions that I'd like to go through real quick here. So the physical traits that define a fish, as opposed to a mammal or a tetrapod or an amphibian, something like that, is first of all the presence of gills. So gills are kind of openings on the lateral sides of the organism that allow for the diffusion of oxygen and the capturing of oxygen for the usage of that organism. Next they have vertebrae that are spool-shaped actually. So we have a nice, huge specimen here, and so what we're looking at here is kind of this overall circular shape, and if I can turn it to the side even, you can see that it kind of pinches in on the sides a little bit, and so that's where we're getting our spool shape. And I'll turn it another direction so you can see here the spool shape of that. And so what I want to show you here, just point out-so you're saying "Well, overall that's not spool shaped." Well what this is actually a neural spine. So the opening here, coming through the middle, is kind of a passageway for the spinal cord, or nerves running down the vertebral column. That's what this is for! And so how that differs from land animals is that we have this spool shape, and so if you can think of them kind of connecting together, they're almost just bumping together as opposed to being really interlocking in their skeletal structure there. So that's something that's unique to fish, and what it does is it allows the fish to be more flexible, really, and so it can use its muscles a little bit better to swim through the water column. So we have this spool-shaped vertebrae that's specific to fish. Additionally, all fish are aquatic, that seems logical if you've ever seen a fish. So all fish are going to be aquatic organisms; we have no amphibians here transitioning from land to water, anything like that. So they're all going to be aquatic organisms. Alright, additionally we want to introduce to you the idea of how the shape of the organism can translate to its life strategy or the function of its overall body. So we're going to talk about the fish triangle. Sounds exciting! It's pretty exciting. And so what this is is kind of a diagram that describes how you can observe the fish and then place it on this diagram and then identify what it does. So we'll kind of dive in here. So we have three groups of fish, we have accelerators, cruisers and maneuverers. So I'll walk through each of these and let you know which features to look for when trying to identify what these guys do. So accelerators, if you can imagine a fish kind of lurking in the murk in a pond or a river, and they have to kind of dart out and maybe catch their prey or maybe escape a predator. These are called accelerators, and how you can identify them is the back of their tail is actually kind of thick compared to the rest of their body, so they're almost like a tube or a column shape, and so there's no real indentation where that tail is, but it's just kind of a really thick, muscular tail, and it allows them to do a really quick whip motion, and they can accelerate through the water really quickly. So we're kind of looking for almost like a column shape for that fish to identify as an accelerator. The cruisers, these guys are kind of gorgeous, I think-these are really, um, kind of hydrodynamically-shaped fish, so they're really sleek, they kind of have that fusiform body shape, they can cut through the water really easy, and what cruisers are thought to be able to do is just go for miles underwater in our vast oceans on Earth here, with very little expenditure of energy. So these are our cruisers, and you might think of a shark actually; they're a great example of a cruiser. They have those stiff pectoral fins that just slice through the water. Their bodies are really sleek, and just a little flick of the tail every now and then just sends them right through the water. So these are our cruisers. The last group of fish are the maneuverers. These guys are wildly varied in their shapes of their bodies, but what they primarily do is they use their pectoral fins to kind of just pivot, turn on a dime, if you will, just pivot in the water, and they can just kind of maneuver into tight spaces. They're not really built for speed unfortunately, but they definitely have a great function, and that's just pivoting around in the water. They can kind of weave their way into a protective area, perhaps. So you're looking for these really nice pectoral fins that they can use to maneuver around. Alright, so within the group fish, we're going to dial into this superclass Agnatha. So "gnath," G-N-A-T-H, that refers to the jaw, and any time you put "an" or "a" before that in your Greek and Latin roots there, that means "the lack there of," more or less. So we have Agnatha here, and these are your jawless fish. So jawless fish arose in the Ordovician, and they still persist today in the recent. There's between 4 and 7 classes, depending on taxonomy, that gets a little dicey with your taxonomical hierarchies there, but there's between 4 and 7 classes of agnathans. So these are filter feeders primarily, or detrital feeders. And so if you think about it, if you don't have a really great functioning jaw, it's going to be difficult to chew for example, and so they're usually kind of scooping up some of the detritus or the sediment on the bottom of the ocean and kind of filtering it out and absorbing the nutrients that way. Or they're kind of swimming through the water column and maybe picking up some plankton or something like that, the nutrients from the water column as they swim. There are some-I think I've seen, you know, on a great program where they're actually allowed to attach themselves to a whale carcass or something, and they can almost tie themselves in a knot and pull themselves off. It's kind of amazing, and they actually do get a chunk of meat there, which is amazing! They don't even have a jaw, but they're allowed to get those types of nutrients. So I don't think I'd want to work that hard to eat my dinner, that's for sure, but they've adapted very well there.

# 4.10 Fish Evolution: Hook, Line, and Sinker 
So we're moving onto the next superclass, and so these are the fish that actually do have the presence of the jaw. They've developed a jaw to kind of facilitate their feeding capabilities, basically. So the first class is the Placodermi. These guys are exciting. So they could have been major predators, some of these placoderms, and they arose in the Silurian and they went extinct in the Devonian, maybe fortunately for us you'll find out why in just a moment. But how you can identify a placoderm is they're covered with these bony plates. They have these really structural plates on the outside, actually, of their bodies that kind of serves as like an armor and their whole body may not be covered in this bony armor, but parts of them were. What we have here is the primitive jawbone. So these are the first ones with kind of the development of the jaw, and they have sort of just a really kind of crude jaw structure there. And these guys were detrital feeders or carnivorous. And so if you take a look at some of the really amazing specimens of placoderms, you can tell just from the head structure and the plate structure and the scary-looking jaw that kind of comes up into a point that these were major predators in the Silurian to the Devonian, so we may have lucked out with that extinction. The next class is the class Chondricthyes. This group is basically a cartilaginous fish. Their skeleton is made primarily of cartilage as opposed to a hardened, bony structure there. These arose in the Devonian, and they still persist today, and you know these as sharks and rays, skates and chimaera, actually. So these are all part of the group Chondrichthyes, and again, they're lacking that bony skeleton, but they have a cartilaginous support system there. These are carnivorous, as you probably know. They're definitely carnivorous here, and how you can identify a class Condrichthyes, or Condrichthyan, from another class is that they have open gill slits. So what that means is if you're observing the fish from a lateral view, you'll actually see sort of stripes along that lateral side of their body, and that those are the open gill slits that you're looking for there. And you'll see in just a minute that other fish actually have a little covering called an operculum that covers up the gill slits in other fish. So Chondrichthyes, you're looking for those stripes on the side that are your open gill slits. So the next class is the class Acanthodii, and what these are, are basically spiny fish. So a lot of their fins, they could have numerous fins along the sides of their body, and they're supported by a long spine, basically, kind of like a sail or something. They have this long spine that supports their fins, and that's how you can identify as an Acanthodian. They arose in the Silurian, and they persisted until the Permian, so the P-T boundary there, we had that great extinction event, and these were one of the fish that met their demise at that time. Acanthodians are also streamlined in their body shape, and again they have the numerous fins that are supported by spines. So these are called the spiny fish. The next class that we're going to get in detail with here is the class Osteichthyes, and so this refers to your bony fish. "Oste" is kind of a term for "bone," really, or "osteo," and "ichthyes" is fish. So Osteichthyes, we have our bony fish here. So they have a bony skeleton, and they're the dominant fish that you'll see today. So your rivers, your lakes, your oceans these are most of the fish that you're going to see. They arose in the Silurian and they persist today, and they have the presence of an air bladder that helps them with their buoyancy control, so they can go up in the water column, down in the water column, with great ease because of this air bladder. And we mentioned this earlier with the operculum, but this is kind of a distinguishing morphological feature of the class Osteichthyes. So they have this kind of bony structure that covers their gill slits and kind of protects the gills from any detritus or something. And so they have this bony covering over the gill slits, and that's called the operculum. So that's something that you can look for if you're a little confused when you're trying to identify an Osteichthyan, you can identify that bony covering around the gills. So within the class Osteichthyes we have a subclass Actinopterygii. Okay, so I know we're getting into a lot of taxonomy here, which is necessary to try to group these organisms in their like groups, if you will. So within the class Osteichthyes we have this subclass Actinopterygii, and these are, again, your dominant fish that you would see today. So these are called ray-finned fish, so what that means is coming off of the body they have kind of delicate spines that are supporting the fins. So these are ray-finned fish. Examples would be a flounder or a trout or a salmon, yum! And these are your ray-finned fish, your Actinopterygians. So the second subclass in the class Osteichthyes, so again, these are your bony fish, are the Sarcopterygii, and these are your lobe-finned fish. So, there aren't too many persisting today but these examples of those are the lungfish, or coelacanth, which actually scientists thought, until very recently, that coelacanth were extinct, and then they found one and found it! And so that's great because we can study these lobe-finned fish a little bit more closely if we have more examples persisting today. And what defines them as a lobe-finned fish is that they have more robust support structures or supporting bones in their fins. So we don't have these fine, delicate rays like the ray-finned fish, but the lobe-finned fish kind of have a fleshy extension that starts the beginning or the base of their fins. So that's what you'll be looking out for, a fleshy pelvic or pectoral fin there. And the reason why these are important and why we were so excited about having the coelacanth persist today is that it's thought that these are the ancestor to tetrapods, so kind of those more robust beginnings of their fins. You can think that if you need a support structure to grow those limbs that would ever support any weight on land, and so they think that this is kind of the predecessor of tetrapods. So when considering these Sarcopterygians, these lobe-finned fish, again these are thought to have been the ancestors to tetrapods, and so what we want to look at a little bit more closely is what that process would have had to have been to translate, kind of, from the aquatic environment to the land environment. So the transition to land, so what did fish need, or what did organisms need, or what was the process that allowed that transition from being mostly confined to a marine environment or aquatic environment to the land situation here? And so what organisms would have needed is the development of a support system, a better support system. So we talked about the fish vertebrae with our spool shape here, and how, you know, it was almost like a bunch of spools stacked on top of each other here, that, again, allowed for great flexibility, but maybe not as much support as a land organism would need. So if we can contrast the fish vertebrae to those that were needed for that transition to land, the ones that tetrapods eventually developed were interlocking vertebrae, so they had these spines, basically, that project across one another and kind of interlock those vertebrae. So it's providing more support-less flexibility. So if you have more things kind of interlocking, you're going to have less flexibility in your vertebral column, but definitely more support. Additionally, there were fewer vertebrae in that transition to land period. Secondly, in the process to that transition to land-dwelling reproduction was still initially dependent on water. So, we still had that dependency on the aquatic system for reproduction there. A huge evolutionary hurdle was the development of lungs. And so we went from being able to kind of filter water or capture oxygen out of the water column to actually being able to breathe air. And so that was a huge jump that occurred and allowed that transition to land. Lastly we have the kind of the different structure of limbs, or even the growth of limbs actually. So we go from having fins to actual limbs that can support weight. So it seems pretty obvious that you needed something to walk around on, but that's one of the major features that had to occur before we had that transition to land. So with this transition to land, we can now address a new superclass, the tetrapods. So tetrapods--these are 4-limbed animals. So again, if we could break down that term a little bit, "tetra" is 4, "pod" is "limb" or "foot" perhaps, but we have tetrapods here. So these are 4-limbed animals and they're specialized for walking as opposed to swimming. So the major groups of tetrapods are your amphibians and your amniotes. Amniotes include your class Aves [ae-vays], or Aves [ah-vays], you have Reptilia and Mammalia. So your amniotes include your birds, your reptiles and your mammals, and your amphibians were the first terrestrial animals, and they were still dependent on water for reproduction, and arose at about the Triassic. So we've thrown a lot of terms at you today, a lot of taxonomical groups, and some key features there to help you identify a fish. If you run across a fossil or if you're snorkeling or fishing, you can actually identify that fish a little bit more closely. And we can kind of walk through geological time, kind of tracing how these organisms evolved and changed in the marine environment, and then how that process started with that transition to land.
