# 8-2 Gonad Male Reproductive System

Hello again. This is our second session on the reproductive system, and we're going to finish up the male reproductive system. We're going to talk about how sperm is formed, and then the role of hormones in particular androgens and estrogen on the male. We're going to start off talking about sperm production. So we're going to talk about the testes which is going to be the gonad and the location of sperm production, and the main bulk of the testis is going to be seminiferous tubules, which is show right here these dark brown tubules, that are filling most of the testis where sperm is going to be made. Once they've been produced, they are not completely mature, and they will enter the epididymis, which is shown right now, which is a very long tube where they will sit and mature. So the production and the maturation takes about 90 days, and so this is a long process. Once they're mature, then they will leave the epididymis through the vas deferens, which will take them past the seminal vesicle and the prostate, which are both going to contribute fluid that then will leave the body. And we'll talk about those later. So, spermatogenesis is going to happen in the testes. And then maturation is going to happen in the epididymis, and as well as, even in the female reproductive tract, and we'll talk about that. And keep in mind, unlike females, this process of producing the gametes (producing sperm) is going to happen throughout a male's life once he reaches sexual maturity. 

So this is another view of these seminiferous tubules in the testes. So this is a lower mag view where this would be a cross-section of a seminiferous tubule. And then if we zoom in even closer, this would be one area of the tubule. You can see the Sertoli cells which have got a blue nucleus in this diagram, and those are the cells that are actually forming the tubule. Remember, those are going to be the cells that are responsive to FSH. They are surrounding these germ cells, and you can see here these forming sperm have these green nuclei and there are layers of them. So they move up as they mature and differentiate until once they get to the lumen, they're ready to be released so that they can enter the epididymis. So, the Sertoli cells are surrounding these forming germ cells, and they are continuously dividing and doing this throughout the male's life. And the Sertoli cells then are going to make an androgen binding protein which is necessary because we know that testosterone is going to be needed to mature and differentiate these sperm. And so the androgen binding protein is going to allow to that testosterone to remain in the area to do its job to help the Sertoli cells. The Sertoli cells can also help convert testosterone to estrogen, which can also be important in maturing the sperm. So those are the Sertoli cells, and we said they were going to be responsive to FSH. 

Then we also have our Leydig cells, which are shown in purple. They're outside of the tubules. They're the ones responsive to LH. And their role is going to be to produce the testosterone, and we're going to have a very similar set up in the female as well. So, the Leydig cells are going to make testosterone in response to LH. They can also make DHT (dihydrotestosterone), which is a much more [unknown] form of testosterone that's going to be particularly important for the secondary male characteristics. They can make this DHT because they have an enzyme called 5-alpha reductase. And remember a lot of the testosterone that the Leydig Cells are going to be producing is going to go out through the body. So, talking about sperm production, we've talked about how FSH is going to be needed to initiate sperm differentiation, testosterone is going to be needed to mature the sperm. 

The number of sperm in semen is going to be very high at 200 to 400 million sperm in 5 mL, and this is necessary because of the fact that fertilization of the egg is not very efficient. So, that even someone who has twenty million sperm per mL is considered infertile because fertilization is so inefficient, and keep mind as well, that maturation of the sperm takes 90 days, and even once they leave the male, they're not completely ready for fertilization. That last step, called capacitation is going to occur in the oviduct, which is also known as the fallopian tube in the female, which is the site of fertilization. 
So let's switch gears to talking more about androgens like testosterone and DHT. Where we talked about, obviously, that testosterone is going to be important for feedback to the GnRH producing neurons in the hypothalamus and important for spermatogenesis. Testosterone is also important for embryonic differentiations. So in a fetus whose brain is developing, without any testosterone the brain, it will develop as a female brain, so testosterone is important in male fetuses to establish the brain as male. And we'll see one particular difference in this axis that we've been talking about in females where that's important. Now we've also talked about how DHT is going to be important for the external virilization, so hair, and secondary sexual characteristics, like beard growth and a deep voice. Also keep in mind that the steroids that we're talking about are going to be delivered by a carrier in the blood, and they're going to act by diffusing into the cell and the nucleus and changing gene expression. Androgens also have anabolic actions, meaning that they promote tissue growth, particularly increasing muscle mass, which is why males are usually more muscular than females. Having excess testosterone, however, is going to have effects, not only to help increase muscle mass even further, but because it's going to act to down regulates the GnRH excess. Then, that means GnRH production will be reduced, which will reduce LH and FSH production, which means certain sperm production will decrease or stop, and so which means then the testes will decrease in size. So you decrease the size of the testes and decrease sperm count with excess testosterone. But testosterone responsive tissues or dependent tissues like the prostate will increase in size as well as muscle. 

So let's just talk about some androgen dependent tissues, which are going to be seminal vesicles and the prostate, which remember, we said were going to contribute fluid while the sperm are leaving the male reproductive tract. So, in the seminal vesicles, it's going to be a fructose rich fluid which is going to be the majority of the volume of semen. And the prostate is going to contribute an alkaline secretion, and it is also going to enlarge under the influence of DHT. And then of course we're going to have other androgen dependent tissues just in the fact that we have these secondary sex traits of increased muscle mass, the facial hair and deep voice, which are different in males because of their abundance of androgens. An important thing to keep in mind is estrogen is also important in the male. And it's going to be more prevalent in tissues that express an enzyme called aromatase which converts testosterone to estrogen. So tissues like fat, breast tissue (even in males), and bone are going to express aromatase. So we're going to talk particularly about bone because testosterone, and also estrogen, are going to stimulate the growth of bones in children. However, the important thing to remember is that estrogen specifically is needed to close the epiphyseal growth plate. So when you close that growth plate that's in the ends of the long bones of the skeleton, then that means that those bones can no longer grow. So that's what happens at the end of puberty, once your adult size, to prevent you from getting any taller. And so if you have a mutation in your estrogen receptor or a mutation in the enzyme aromatase that produces estrogen from testosterone, then those males without some form of treatment will continue to grow their whole lives. So in this session, we've talked about how we need testosterone for the differentiation and of sperm, and also for embryonic differentiation. And that DHT is going to be what's important for secondary sex characteristics. But then we've also talked about how estrogen is going to be important, particularly in bone in closing the epiphyseal plate.
