# 5-7 Respiratory System: Regulation of Breathing
Hello, we're going to now talk about the regulation of breathing. We've talked about the determinance of arterial pressure of oxygen and CO2, and now we're going to talk about how that ties together with determining how much we breathe. So we've got two different types of receptors: peripheral receptors and central receptors, meaning that they're in the brain in the brain stem. Where the peripheral receptors, and we'll talk about where they are in a minute, can sense arterial CO2, O2 and pH, and the central receptors can detect the arteriole CO2. Those are going to feed into a respiratory center in the medulla of the brain which is then going to cause a simulation of motor neurons leading to the diaphragm and muscles in the chest. So remember that the diaphragm is going to be a skeletal muscle. So it's going to be controlled by the somatic nervous system, so every time we breathe, those motor neurons controlling those muscles have to receive a signal to contract. So, we've got both of these, peripheral receptors and central receptors. The peripheral receptors are found in the carotid arteries and aortic bodies in the aorta. They are going to be stimulated, they're going to be chemo receptors, they're going to be stimulated by a drop in oxygen, an increase in CO2. So, that makes sense, if you need to breathe more, it could be because your oxygen in your blood drops or because the CO2 in your blood increases. It also responds to a decrease in pH. If we have a decrease in pH, that means we have an increase in proton concentration. And remember, we said protons are always linked to CO2. So if you have an increase in protons, you want to breathe more to get rid of more CO2, which means you're going to get rid of those protons that are excess. And we'll talk much more about this in a few minutes. The central receptors are a little more complicated. They're still chemo receptors, but it's more complicated. Since they're in the brain, which means they're on the other side of the blood brain barrier, they actually sense protons, but protons aren't going to cross the blood-brain barrier. What can cross the blood-brain barrier is CO2. And so if arterial CO2 levels rise, then that will lead to a rise of CO2 in the brain, and we know through that carbonic anhydrase reaction, if we increase CO2 in the brain, that will increase protons in the brain which will then act on these central chemoreceptors. This is just a diagram showing you the aortic bodies, peripheral chemoreceptors in the aorta, and the carotid bodies in the carotid arteries coming up from the aorta, and how if you have a decrease in P, little A O2, arterial pressure of oxygen. Well, actually, this diagram's showing you a decrease in inspired oxygen, which will lead to a decrease in alveolar oxygen, lead to a decrease in arterial oxygen. That will cause increase firing of the peripheral chemoreceptors and lead to increased frequency of contractions of the respiratory muscles. Much as we had the muscle spindle receptors, and the golgi tendon organs in the muscles, and we have the stretch receptors in our bodies for proprioception, we also have receptors in the lung. One type, sense stretch. They're in the smooth muscle of, the large and small airways of the lung. These are going to be important to prevent excess stretch for, of the lung. So it's going to be similar to the muscle spindle receptors, where it's going to cause a reflex called the herring brewer reflex, which is going to, cause stop inspiration if we have the lung inflated too much. So it prevents us from inhaling so much that we damage our lung by overfilling it. So this could be particularly important in rigorous exercise when we tend to inhale maximally. There are also j receptors where, which are in the walls of the capillaries, which are going to be affected by different disease processes, and can lead to rapid breathing or labored breathing, which can often be seen in patients with different problems, respiratory problems. And then there's pulmonary irritant receptors, which are going to be in the cells lining the airways. So in the epithelial cells and in the cells lining the nasal mucosa, where, if they get irritated that it will cause a cough. So that makes sense. If you are around a lot of dust and then you, you, that can cause you to cough, that's one of the responses. The other response is going to be bronchoconstriction, which makes sense. If you're in an area that has a lot of particles, not only do you want to cough to get them out, but you want to constrict your airways so that more particles don't get in or go farther into the respiratory system. Okay, so we're going to switch gears to talk about protons again. So we talked about how in tissues, oxygen bound to hemoglobin is going to come off of that hemoglobin, because we're going to have low oxygen content and pressure in the tissues. That deoxyhemoglobin, one of the things it's going to do, we already talked about, is bind protons. This is going to be important to maintain the pH of the blood so that the difference between venous blood and arterial blood is relatively small, compared to if we didn't have hemoglobin to bind those protons. Once then, that blood gets to the alveoli, then oxygen is going to bind the hemoglobin, which is going to release the proton. But then that proton is going to be feeding into this set of reactions, which it means, then, CO2 is going to rise, which is then going to diffuse into the alveoli. So then, our PH, because of this reaction, is going to get back to normal, because those protons are going to be causing an increase in CO2. If you got an increase in protons, it's going to lead to an increase in CO2. And then that's going to leave the lung. There can also be, problems in the respiratory system, which are going to change the amount of the pressure of CO2 in the lungs. So one could be something like respiratory acidosis, which is a problem where, if for some reason you stop breathing as much as you usually do, or as much as you should, if you've taken some sort of pain killer that depresses your breathing so that your respiration falls. We talked about how that means you're not going to be getting as much fresh air into your lung, while, but your body is still putting the CO2 into the lung and we talked about that, how hypoventilation is going to increase the pressure of CO2 in the lung and in the arterial blood. That, if we increase CO2, then we're going to be increasing the number of protons. So that hypoventilation can lead to what we call respiratory acidosis. A increase in a decrease in pH, resulting from an increase in protons that is because of a problem with the respiratory system. Similarly, you could have something like a panic attack that causes you to hyperventilate, causes you to increase your ventilation. And we talked about if that happens, you're bringing in more fresh air but still producing the same amount of CO2 you were before, which means that the pressure of CO2 is going to go down, it's going to go lower. But we know if CO2 goes down, then protons are going to go down, because of this reaction with carbonic anhydrase, which means if protons decrease in the body, we're going to be having an alkalosis. And, in this case, it's due to the respiratory system. Okay? And we'll be talking about this more in a minute. So let's just briefly look, at the effects of protons binding the hemoglobin, where we know that, when oxygen is given to the tissues, that means oxygen's going to be coming off of hemoglobin, which frees up hemoglobin so that it can bind a proton. Similarly, in those tissues, CO2 is going to be picked up, which is going to increase CO2 in the red blood cell, which remember, if CO2 goes up then protons are going to go up because of this carbonic anhydrous reaction. And so again, those protons can bond hemoglobin, which is going to help buffer the blood and prevent the pH from changing as much as it would without hemoglobin there to buffer the protons. So let's switch a little bit, and talk about how changes in the pressure of oxygen, CO2, and the concentration of protons, how those changes are going to result in changes in ventilation. So we've already said, we've got a pressure of oxygen in the arterial system that's going to be around 100. If we decrease the pressure of oxygen in the blood, then we're going to get an increase in ventilation, over what we had at rest. That makes sense. If you decrease your oxygen pressure, that means, in the blood, that means you need to take in more oxygen to correct that problem. It's just a negative feedback loop. What's interesting about this curve, however, is that even at a decrease in the arterial pressure of oxygen down to 80, you do not get a significant increase in ventilation. It happens way out here at 40 and 50 millimeters of mercury. So that the respiratory system is not super sensitive to the pressure of oxygen in the blood. To some extent, we know that's okay, because this is just a minority of the oxygen in blood. We know, out here at 80 millimeters of mercury, even though that's a 20% reduction in the dissolved oxygen in blood, we know that at 80 millimeters, hemoglobin is still almost fully saturated. So because of hemoglobin, and the fact that it remains saturated way out here at these fairly low pressures of oxygen, in some ways that lets the body be less sensitive to the pressure of oxygen in the blood, because we've got hemoglobin that's binding most of the oxygen, and it remains saturated at these pressures like 80 millimeters. But still note that the only thing the body is measuring here is the oxygen dissolved in plasma. It has no way through this system of measuring the oxygen bound to hemoglobin, which normally is fine, but can be a problem and we'll talk about that soon. You notice the curve for CO2 is much
 steeper. So if CO2 increases just a few millimeters of mercury, we get a fairly significant increase in ventilation. So it's going to be most sensitive to the pressure of CO2 in the blood, compared to oxygen or protons. So we've touched on this before. Lets talk about this again. We're sitting here at normal level, and if we increase our amount of protons, which means we're decreasing the PH, then, we want to breathe more. We're going to increase our ventilation. We want to do that so that we can get rid of more CO2 than we were before, which means that we're really getting rid, rid of protons. So we're essentially getting rid of CO2 to, to get the pH of the body back to where it should be. So let's talk about that in a different way. So we've talked about before how we can have respiratory acidosis, which is going to be caused by somehow decreasing ventilation. If you decrease ventilation, PaCO2's going to increase. You're not getting in as much fresh air. If we increase CO2, we're going to increase protons, which means pH is going to decrease. The whole problem here was with ventilation, so this is respiratory acidosis. If, instead, we increase the ventilation, if we hyperventilate, we said we're going to decrease the pressure of CO2 in the blood. If we decrease CO2, then we're decreasing protons, which means we're increasing the pH. Since the source of the problem was respiratory, then we have respiratory alkalosis. We can also use the respiratory system as a compensation for other types of alkalosis and acidosis, which we call metabolic acidosis or alkalosis. So that if you have metabolic acidosis, for instance, say you've run a marathon, which means you've produced lots of lactic acid in your body, which is what we're seeing here. So you've got increased protons, which means you've got decreased pH. To essentially try to get rid of those protons, in a rapid way, because the kidney can do it, but it's slow, to get rid of it in a rapid way, then you can increase your ventilation. That's a compensation to all these extra protons coming from lactic acid. That's goig to act like hyperventilation would to decrease your PaCO2. Similarly, you could have and that's actually what's happening here on this graph, where, if you, we said, if you increase the protons because of lactic acid making, the pH lower, causing metabolic alkalosis, metabolic acidosis, then you get this increase in ventilation. That's the compensation. It's not causing the problem. Similarly, we can have metabolic alkalosis. Say you get a stomach virus and your'e vomiting a fair amount for a couple days. You're just losing acid from your stomach, over and over again, which means that the plasma proton is going to decrease, concentration's going to decrease, pH is going to increase, and so now, your body wants to try to hold on to CO2. Because each time you lose CO2, it's like losing a proton, and your problem is you've got alkalosis. So that's when you're going to decrease ventilation, which will increase the PaCO2, which is going to try to, to, to hold, help reduce the loss of protons. So, if you look at the pH and the PaCO2, those are the only two numbers you need to have about a patient to then be able to determine whether you have respiratory alkalosis, respiratory acidosis, or metabolic acidosis or alkalosis, by looking at those two categories about a patient. So keep that in mind in terms of the exam and being able to work through problems. So we've talked about respiratory acidosis, alkalosis, and how those are going to change PaCO2 levels, but then we also have metabolic acidosis and alkalosis, which are going to cause changes in the respiratory system to try to compensate. We learned how PaCO2 is going to be the most important in determining how frequently we breathe, and how we have both the central and the peripheral chemoreceptors that are going to be able to be monitoring and leading to changes in the respiratory rate.
