# 5-8 Respiratory System: Exercise and Hypoxia
Hello, this is our last respiratory session. We're going to just kind of apply some of what we learned to states like exercise and hypoxia. Where, remember we just talked about, or in the last session we talked about how changes in oxygen, CO2 and proton concentration in the blood is going to determine how much ventilation the aveoli see. And so this set of graphs is showing, different values. Over different levels of exercise. So, going from rest to maximal exercise, how did some of these things change? So if we look, let's just divide it in half and look at the left half of this graph. We see that the. Basically pH, the proton concentration, the CO2 levels in the blood and the Oxygen tension of the blood and the, are going to stay the same. So, even though we're starting to exercise more and more as we move through this graph, the oxygen, c02, and proton concentrations are going to remain the same, because our ventilation is keeping them the same. As we exercise more, we take in more air so that those levels can remain constant. However, when we get towards maximal exercise, you can see how some of these things change. Oxygen is going to remain stable. However, the amount of protons is going to increase the concentration. And the pressure of CO2 actually decreases. And you can see that minute ventilation now, instead of being linear, is curving upwards. That's getting more and more ventilation per increase in oxygen consumption through exercise. And so what is happening here is that we're having this metabolic acidosis where we're getting more and more acid produced from the working of our muscles producing lactic acid. Which is obviously going to increase proton concentration, that increase in protons is going to cause an increase in ventilation, which we see then also resolving in a lower PCO2. So this is our compensation for this increased proton, is an increase in ventilation, which is going to lead to a lowering of PCO2. So that's what's going to happen during maximal exercise as a result of metabolic acidosis. The other concept that you can, examine in terms of exercise, is how ventilation changes while you're exercising. So before, during, and after you exercise. So that's what this is showing. We're at rest. You start down here in terms of your minute ventilation. And then you notice, as soon as you start to exercise, you get this big increase in minute ventilation. And this is particularly going to happen in someone who exercises frequently. Because they can train themselves to anticipate exercise When that's really not necessary yet. So this is going to be. A feed-forward, forward process. I think really the first time we've talked about this since Dr. Jacoy introduced it to you where we haven't gotten a stimuls that O2 is higher in the blood or CO2 is higher in the blood. We're just increasing the ventilation because we know all of that is, Is coming. And so that's a feed forward process. It's an instantaneous increase in ventillation. Then, after we go a little bit, while, now our O2 is starting to drop, out Co2 is starting to increase and so we are going to increase our minute ventillation as we go until it becomes. Is adequate and, it matches what we need and reaches it's peak at the end of exercise. Once we stop, you notice how we have a large, instantaneous decrease in the Minute ventilation because we stopped the activity, we are no longer using all of that oxygen and producing all of that Co2. However, it has not come back down to rest yet and so this is happening. We still have increase in ventilation due to what we call oxygen debt. The fact that our myoglobin which is a molecule very similar to hemoglobin that binds oxygen to store it in the muscles. That has been depleted of oxygen, so we need to continue to breathe as that's restoring its stores of oxygen. We need to restore creatine phosphate and we need to breathe to continue to Counteract any metabolic acidosis. And so, this little tail here of increased respiration that can last several minutes is going to be due to replenishing the systems and getting them completely back to normal. 'Kay we're going to finish up talking about hypoxia which is going to be a deficiency of oxygen in tissues for some reason. And we're going to talk about 4 different types. 1 is just hypoxic hypoxia. Which is when we have low arterial oxygen. That's why The body is not getting enough oxygen. It's causing a reduced amount of oxygen in the blood in terms of PAO2 and we'll talk about some causes of that in the next slide. Then we can also have anemic hypoxia. So remember how we talked about how the way the body is going to be measuring the amount of oxygen, primarily, is going to be through these chemo receptors that are measuring only the dissolved oxygen in the blood. But remember we said that's only 1 to 2 percent of the oxygen in blood, and so if you have For instance, too few red blood cells, which means you're going to have less hemoglobin in your blood, which is going to dramatically affect the overall oxygen content of your blood. And so you can have a low oxygen content. And basically not have the body not realize it in terms of the systems we've talked about, because they're measuring the oxygen that's dissolved, and that's just fine. Then you can have Ischemic hypoxia, where, for instance the lungs are functioning perfectly fine that the blood is completely oxygenated, it's just that there's low oxygen delivery to, for instance, let's say a certain tissue. It could be because blood flow is restricted to a certain tissue which prevents oxygen delivery even though there's plenty of oxygen around. And if there's no problem with the respiratory system. Then there's histotoxic hypoxia, which is when there's plenty of oxygen around. It's even getting to the tissue, but the tissue can't use it. So an example of this would be in cyanide poisoning where the cyanide disrupts electron transport chain and so oxidative phosphorylation can happen. So you know it doesn't matter how much oxygen is delivered to the tissue if the tissue can't use the oxygen to form atp. Then it's still going to be a hypoxic situation. Where o, oxygen is limiting. So let's just go over some causes for hypoxic hypoxia where, it's a process that's lowering the arterial pressure of oxygen. So one could be hypoventilation for instance, taking too much of a drug that has a side effect of reducing ventilation. We could have a diffusion impairment, so having really bad pneumonia with lots of mucous and inflammation in the lung or having pulmonary edema with fluid in the lung that then causes diffusion to be much slower. And less efficient, which then is going to mean that we're not going to get completely saturated by the time the blood leaves the lung. And so, again, PaO2 will be reduced. And then we talked about V-Q mismatch, how that can be a problem that can lead to. Reduced oxygen content or pressure of oxygen in the arterial blood. Another situation that can cause hypoxia, hypoxic hypoxia specifically, is sleep apnea. So when we sleep, we have lots of changes in terms of breathing frequency, how much we breathe in, in terms of the flow of the breathing. Minute ventilation. Those are all going to decrease. And, skeletal muscle tone is going to decrease. Our skeletal muscles are going to be relaxed. So based on that and based on a person's anatomy in terms of their nasal passages and their throat and their neck, that can lead to, collapse of the upper airways. Either partially, which then often's going to sound like snoring, or completely. And if it's complete, then that's when sleep apnea occurs where it could, breathing could stop for up to a minute. And then eventually the CO2 levels are going to be high enough that it's going to cause the person to awake, awaken so that then they can take in a big gasp of air. And so this is obviously disruptive to sleep because these people could be having these episodes many, many, many times a night so that they wake up frequently, aren't getting the proper sleep, which can reduce Their quality of life and their health. And so this is going to be a big problem that's needs to be corrected, and it can be corrected by a CPAP machine, which is[UNKNOWN] Stands for continuous positive airway pressure, where if the person sleeps with this CPAP mask on it, it, constantly sends air of positive pressure which then holds open those airways so that they don't have the sleep apnea. So In the in the medulla we'll have this apnea center which is going to respond to increases in PaCO2, again since it's in the central nervous system it's going to be the CO2 that diffuses across the blood brain barrier and then increases the Proton concentration which will be sensed in the apnea center. So we've talked about exercise, how it's going to be really kind of the most common reason why we increase our ventilation, and how if we're really exercising maximally we're going We can develop metabolic acidosis. Which is going to cause us to compensate with the respiratory system to increase ventilation. Which is going to decrease paCO2. Which is going to decrease proton levels as a compensation. And then we talked about hypoxea, in particular sleep apnea which is going to depress, with sleep in general is going to depress breathing and later relaxation of the areal muscles and this can result, if you have a certain anatomy, result in collapse of the airways and sleep apnea.
