# 9-3 GI: Digestion and Absorption  
Greetings. Today we're going to talk about digestion and absorption. The learning objectives that we want to explain, the first is the mechanism of digestion and absorption, and identify where they're going to occur within the GI tract. The second thing we want to talk about is the absorption of water and where this occurs along the GI tract. And then the last is the underlying mechanism for diarrhea and it's causes. 

So as you recall, the digestive tract or the GI tract (gastrointestinal tract) starts at the mouth as a tube, which is called the esophagus, which very rapidly delivers the food materials into the stomach. And then in the stomach, we secrete acid and this acid then it starts to act on the food materials, degrading the protein materials, and as it's doing so it makes what's called an acidic chyme. And the acidic chyme is going to leave the stomach at a very slow rate and enter into the duodenum. And the reason that it has to take a slow rate is that, once the acidic chyme, which is a very low pH, is entering into the duodenum (that's the first part of the small intestine), this area does not have a barrier that's resistant to acid, so if acid is delivered to the beginning of duodenum, we could get a erosion of that epithelium. By having the acidic chyme being squeezed out of the stomach in very small dollops, that is in about three or four milliliters at a time, then the acid, as it arrives in the duodenum, can be neutralized. So we want to have a slow emptying of the stomach, and it usually takes about four hours to empty the stomach. The second thing that can be a slow entry of food coming into the duodenum, into the first part of the small intestine, is due to having a fatty meal. And if you think about it when you have a fatty meal, the fat tends to be not soluble in water, and it tends to float on top of the aqueous solution. So if you have a pan of water and you add vegetable oil or you add olive oil to it, the oils tends to form a little puddle up on the surface of that water. The same thing is happening in your stomach. So as the stomach contents, the HCl is aqueous, and as the acidic chyme is being removed from the stomach, the fat is tending to float on the surface and is one of the last things then to be removed from the stomach. And the third thing that makes a very slow exiting of material from the stomach into the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine, is if you have a hypertonic solution. The stomach walls are not permeable to water, so we could actually drink pure water, and it doesn't affect the movement of water across the walls. And you can have very high hypertonic solutions coming into the stomach such as a Coke, if you drink a Coke or Pepsi cola, some type of soda. This hypertonic solution is fine in the stomach, but if it goes into the small intestine, then in the small intestine, the walls are permeable to water, and at all times the lumen of the intestine, in fact all of the small intestine and the large intestine are isotonic to the cells. That's kept at 300,000,000 osmoles at all times. And water will move across the cells from the blood space across the cells and into the lumen., and from the lumen towards the blood to maintain this isotonicity. So if we add a hypertonic solution to the duodenum, and we do so very quickly, what will happen is that a lot of water will move into the lumen as well, and this will stretch the walls of the duodenum. It will be very painful. The only type of pain that you perceive from the GI track is stretch. You can cut it, you can burn it, but you don't recognize the pain. But if you stretch the walls, then it's a painful response. So we are going to deliver the chyme then, very slowly from the stomach, emptying the stomach over four hours, and that material is going to be entering into the beginning of the small intestine, which is the duodenum. 

Now the small intestine is built in such a way that we have essentially 10 meters of tubing. The first ten inches is the duodenum, and then we have five meters of jejunum, and five meters of ileum. The tube itself is made of a muscular … It is going to be an aqueous environment within the lumen of the tube, and it is within that aqueous environment that we are going to have digestion. We're going to break down food materials within the lumen, and then we're going to move these materials across the cells, absorb the materials across the cells, and that both of those processes take time. And so therefore, the movement of the chyme, or the food materials through this particular area of the body, is going to be slow. It will be over a period of two to four hours as we move the materials through the intestine, and that is through the small intestine where we have digestion and absorption, and into the large intestine (which I will refer to as the colon), and that's where we have absorption predominantly of water and electrolytes. Right, so that means that we have to have some chyme of not only regulated entry of materials into the small intestine. Also we're going to be moving materials from the accessory glands, and secreting those materials into the lumen of the of the small intestine, where digestion is going to occur. 

So what are some of these materials? So the first of these is that when we have carbohydrates arriving into the duodenum, the epithelium of the duodenum recognizes that carbohydrates are present within the lumen, and they send a signal, which is a hormone, (and there is more than one) but in this particular case, the glucagon-like peptide-1. Glucogan-like peptide-1 works on the pancreas and on the islets of the pancreas. And as you recall, the islets of the pancreas have an endocrine function, they are going to secrete insulin into the blood. The glucogon-like peptide-1 does not cause the secretion of the insulin, but it potentiates the secretion of the insulin to be released from the beta cells. The second of these signals, which again are going to be coming from the duodenal epithelial cells, is in response to fat and peptides. So when peptides, remember we started the digestion of protein into peptides, and then the peptides now are going to be delivered to the duodenum. 

The peptides will cause the duodenum to secrete a hormone which is called cholecystokinin or CCK. The cholecystokinin also works on the pancreas, but it's working on the exocrine cells of the pancreas. These exocrine cells secrete their inactive enzymes into a duct, and the duct then delivers those inactive enzymes directly into the movement of the duodenum. The inactive enzymes are called zymogens. And when they arrive in the duodenum, there is a protease present, which is tripsin, and the tripsin can activate all of these inactive enzymes which are coming from the pancreas. The second effect that the CCK has is on the gall bladder. The gallbladder is the storage site for bile, which is a detergent-like molecule synthesized by the liver. The liver is secreting bile continuously, and is stored within the gallbladder. And when needed, then CCK causes contraction of the gallbladder and expels the bile directly into a duct, which then delivers the bile to the duodenum. The bile, as we'll talk about in a few minutes, is a detergent that's necessary for the digestion of the fats. And the last is the arrival of acids, and when we have an acidic chyme coming into the duodenum, then the epithelial cell secretes the hormone secretin. And we've already talked about how secretin mediates a negative feedback to the antral portion of the stomach, where it inhibits the secretion of gastrin by the G cell. Secretin also sends a signal to the pancreas, and in the pancreas, it will cause the duct cells of the pancreas to secrete bicarbonate. This bicarbonate is used to neutralize the acidic chyme that’s coming into the lumen of the duodenum, and in addition, is making an alkaline environment. It is this alkaline environment that's necessary for the optimal activity of all of the pancreatic enzymes, which are going to degrade the food materials. And these enzymes include things which are proteases, they're lipases, they're nucleases, and they're able to degrade all the material which are coming into the body as food stuffs. 

So let's just look at this exocrine pancrease cell for a second. The exocrine pancreas cells, as I said, will secrete it's materials into a duct. It looks a little like an eye dropper where you have the bulb at the one end of the eye dropper and you have the duct cells coming off from that. So the cells are identified here, and they're sort of in a cluster, or a ball, so sometimes you see that they're called acinar cells. But these are exocrine cells. This cholecystokinin, which is that hormone coming from the duodenum, will cause these cells to secrete the zymogen granules, and the zymogen granules are these little red dots that I've indicated here on the top of the cells. So the zymogen granules, these are simply that we have a vesicle which is chock filled of inactive enzymes, and these vesicles will move up to the plasma membrane surface, and then secrete all of these zymogens, or inactive enzymes, out of the cells, and they will then enter into the duct. As I say, they become activated once they reach the duodenum. The second effect that will occur is that secretin what causes an increase in bicarbonate. And is from the duct cells, that's these cells, these are the cells that are lining the ducts. So these cells will secrete bicarbonate. The bicarbonate is also delivered to the duodenum, we neutralize the acidic chyme and we make a an alkaline environment so that the enzymes, which have been delivered into the lumen, are now activated at their optimal pH. All right now. 

Let's, so let's consider what's happening within the GI tract itself, and particularly, what's happening within the duodenum and in the ileum, which is the next segment of the small intestine. This is where we have most of the digestion of materials occurring within the lumen, and then we start to absorb these materials across the epithelial cells, which line this area. There's two points about these epithelial cells. One is that there are big folds of these cells, which are called villi. And in addition to that, there are small folds on the surfaces of these small cells, and these small folds are called microvilli. The folds of both the villi and the microvilli, are increasing the absorptive area of this of this region so that all through the small intestine, we have a very large absorptive area. And it's the size of a double's court for tennis. What's located on the lumenal surfaces of these cells are transporters, and we have all different types of transporters, but I want to talk about a couple of important ones. The first one is, the glucose sodium cotransporter, and this is called the SGLT. The SGLT is the salt, glucose transporter. This transporter is moving glucose into the interior of the cell. So the digested carbohydrate has released glucose. Now the glucose molecules, and sodium moving into one of these epithelial cells, as the glucose enters into the cell, it's transported across the cell to the opposite side, to the basal surface. And there it exits the cell via a GLUT transport. So we have a GLUT transporter sitting on the basal surface, and on the apical surface we have a sodium-glucose cotransporter. The ability of these cells to bring glucose into the cells, and across the cells, and into the interstitium on the opposite side is driven by the sodium gradient that's within the cells. And this is called a secondary active transport. So secondary active transport is occurring because on the basal surface of the cells we have our sodium-potassium ATPase. As the sodium is entering the cell, the sodium-potassium ATPase is extruding it from the cell keeping the gradient very low within the cell for sodium. The presence of the SGLT, once it was discovered, has now enabled individuals to become rehydrated very quickly from the dehydrated state. The example of this is that there is a football team, which is called the Gators, and this a Florida football team. These team players were playing in the hot sun, and the coach was worried that they were getting dehydrated and wanted to have a very fast way that he could rehydrate his players. So he went to the nephrologists at the medical center that was nearby, and asked them what substance he should give to his players to rehydrate them quickly. And the substance, of course, was salt, glucose and water. And that substance was then called Gatorade. And it became a commercial product and the school now is it has a patent on Gatorade. So the Gatorade is using the SGLT to rehydrate the body quickly. There are other transporters that are located on these cells (and that's what's indicated here). So we have simple amino acids. So we degrade the proteins into amino acids and then these amino acids, and there are all different types of amino acids, are then moved with cotransporters into the epithelial cells. And they again cross the cell and are extruded at the basal surface with a transporter. They exit the cells, and then enter into the blood and are delivered to the liver. This is, again, a secondary active transport where the sodium concentration within the cells is kept low by the sodium-potassium ATPase, which has not been shown here, but as you all know is present on the basal surfaces of all cells. So the sodium is extruded, and the sodium-potassium ATPase is doing so. It's a primary active transport, but when it's coupled to this cotransporter, then it's called secondary active transport of the amino acid. 

There is also a way that amino acids can get across these cells and this is from use of the dipeptides or the tripeptides. They combine to a transporter as well, and that's what's shown here. And this is called the pep T transporter. The pep T transporter uses a proton instead of sodium. And as the proton enters into the cells because of its low gradient, then the peptides move into the cells. They're piggybacking onto the transporter. They're degraded to amino acids within the cell, and then leave in the basal surface by the simple transporters for amino acids. And again, this is a secondary active transport. As we're moving all of these materials (these nutrients) across these cells, we're also moving ions across the cells and we're moving water. So we have to maintain isotonic conditions within the lumen, and that is done by moving water. So as we move these materials, water is also traversing the cells and taken up into the body during feeding. 

So what about fats? Now, fats are different. I told you fats will be the last thing to leave the stomach, because they float on top of the on top of the acidic chyme, and eventually late after feeding, the fats will enter into the duodenum. The fat droplets, as they enter into the duodenum., bind or combine with bile. The bile is our detergent and the bile is the molecule that's coming from the liver via the gallbladder. So we have it stored in the gallbladder, and then delivered when needed. The bile will cause the fat droplets to break into smaller droplets. So we're increasing the surface area of the droplet, and by increasing the surface area of the droplet, the colipase, which is a protein, combine to this area in high number. And then the lipase, which is the enzyme that will cleave these fats, can then act. We break the fat droplets down into free fatty acids, into monoglycerides, and there's also free cholesterol. And these molecules enter into the cells mostly by simple diffusion, but there also could be some transporters that are active to move this material into the cells. Once they're inside the cells, the cell re-synthesizes the fats into triglycerides. It combines the fats with the triglycerides and the cholesterol, with proteins to form what are called chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are very large particles, and chylomicrons are not able to pass across the plasma membrane. The chylomicrons are secreted by the cell at the basal surface. And as they enter into the interstitial space, the chylomicrons are so large that they cannot get across the epithelium that's lining the blood vessels. Instead, the chylomicrons enter into the lymphatic circulation. They enter into the lymphatic circulation because the epithelium, the cells that are lining the lymphatic vessels, are more leaky than those of the blood vessels. And these large molecules are able to go across at this region. They enter into the lymphatic drainage, the lymphatic drainage then will come back to the heart, and the material then will move into the blood circulation at the heart, and then from there be delivered to the liver. So that's our absorption of fat. 

Now, by the time we get to the ileum, this is where most of the absorption is occurring within the small intestine, the ileum is also the primary site where removing water across the epithelial cells. So, water and nutrients, electrolytes, and so forth are being reabsorbed, or absorbed across the ileum. The amount of secretions that we have added to the GI tract is as much as 7 liters. So 7 liters have been added to the tract. And we started with 2 liters of fluid, and now we have to reabsorb the 7 liters of fluid, before it arrives into the colon. And that 7 liters of fluid is taken up predominately along the tract that is the jejunum and the ileum. The ilium also is the site where we remove the bile from the lumen, and take it back up into the body. So there is a receptor which recognizes the bile, and the bile is then recycled back to the liver via the blood. And as you would recall, the ileum also has a receptor for intrinsic factor, which was secreted by the parietal cells. And this is the carrier for vitamin B12. So, the ileum is the site where that carrier and vitamin B12 is then taken up into the body. 

So, that leaves the large intestine. So, what happens with the large intestine? So, we had 2 liters of fluid coming into the stomach, we then add 7 liters along the small intestine, we reabsorb 7 liters back into the body, and that leaves about 2 liters of material to be delivered to the large intestine. These 2 liters of material of the non-digested materials is going to be delivered to the colon, or the large intestine. The function of the colon is to concentrate that material. So, this is a very watery type of of feces. And normally only about 200 milliliters or 500 milliliters of feces is excreted per day. So 2 liters is entering into this region and we concentrate it by removing water. So water is going to be moving from the lumen of the colon across the cells which are lining the colon and into the blood. This occurs under normal conditions, and this is occurring due to the movement of ions from one part of the lumenal surface, from the lumenal content into the to the opposite side of the cells. So the sodium is moving across these cells, water is following the sodium, and we're moving both sodium and chloride across these cells. 

Now, what happens under the condition where if not all of the nutrients have been reabsorbed? There is, for instance, a situation called lactose intolerance, and these are individuals, myself included, where the sugar lactose which is present in milk products such as ice cream, is not digested by the small intestine because the enzyme that can cleave this disaccharide into small simple sugars is missing. The lactose is delivered to the colon, but the colon has no transporters for nutrients. So, as this material is coming into the colon, the sugar is osmotically active. So, instead of water then moving from the lumen of the colon across the epithelium and entering into blood, that material is now holding the water within the lumen. So we now have water being held in the lumen due to the presence of lactose. That will cause far more water to be present within the lumen of the colon, and instead of having a concentrated feces, we now will have a very watery dilute feces. That could be 500 milliliters or more. And that, of course, you all know as diarrhea. When we lose a lot of water from the colon, you're also losing a lot of bicarbonate at the same time. So the loss of  large amounts of water by diarrhea will cause the body to also lose bicarbonate. Now there is one other thing I want to talk about and then we're going to come back to the idea of diarrhea. So the last thing I want to talk about is the water absorption in the fasting state. And this can occur all through the small intestine and the large intestine. That is also occurring within the gall bladder, and this is how you concentrate the bile within the gall bladder. This is called the standing water gradient, and as I told you, we have an isotonic solution in the lumen of this long intestine. Let's say this is the small intestine, and we have an isotonic solution on the interstitial side. So, the problem is how do you move water from an isotonic state to an isotonic state, and as you all recall, water moves by osmosis so it moves when we have a gradient for water. And under these conditions, we do not have a gradient for water. So how does this cell generate a gradient for water? It does so by locating the sodium potassium ATPases along the lateral surfaces of these cells. So if we have the first epithelial cell here, and the second is here, and they are held together by a tight junction, which is a seal which doesn't allow the lumenal content to come across and into the interstitial space between the cells. That means that as you're pumping the sodium out from these lateral surfaces as well as from the basal lateral surfaces, from the base of these cell, that you can generate a very high concentration of sodium between the cells. So it's a very local pocket of high concentration of sodium. This will draw water from the lumen of the cell across and out to these lateral surfaces, and the water now has a gradient. So the water is moving from a lower concentration of sodium to a high concentration of sodium between the cells. This dilutes the material between the cells, we then increase the volume in that region, and the increase in volume or pressure of having more volume between the cells then pushes it down into the interstitium at the base of the cell and into the blood. So standing water gradient then allows the movement of water across the cells. and that's because we're setting up this very small intimate concentration of sodium that's localized between the cells. 

Now there are disorders of the GI tract from which you are all familiar. The first is if we had delayed emptying from the stomach, this can lead to nausea, it can lead to vomiting, you can feel bloating, you can feel a lot of pressure within the stomach and you could have heartburn. The other is very rapid emptying through the tract. And under these conditions, you can feel very weak, you get to have sweats, dizzy and you get a diarrhea. So, the movement of materials through these different regions of the tract needs to be regulated. And when we come back the next time we're going to talk about motility through the tract, and how we move materials from one area to another. And it's sort of a timed movement of materials through these different regions. Well let's just consider diarrhea again for a few minutes. So, there are two types of diarrhea. One is secretory diarrhea. In secretory diarrhea, the diarrhea occurs because there's an imbalance in the distribution of ions across the across the epithelial cells. For instance if we have an infection by Vibrio cholera. This bug infects in the ileum, and it causes a very high concentration of chloride to be moved into the lumen of the ileum. The sodium will also follow the chloride to keep a balance of charges. So we have now a lot of sodium and chloride sitting within the lumen of the ileum. And this material is delivered to the colon, and when it comes into the colon, then as we know sodium and chloride are osmotically active, they're holding water within the lumen of the colon. And it overwhelms the ability of the colon to move the sodium and the chloride into the body, to move the water across that area and into the body, and it results in diarrhea. With cholera you can lose many liters of fluid very rapidly, and the major problem is the dehydration of the individual. If the individual is hydrated sufficiently over a period of two or three days where the cholera bug is active, then the patient can actually outlive the bug. The bug will die within the GI tract. And the patient will be fine. So what is it that you hydrate the patient with? Well, obviously we're going to run the SGLT. So you have salt, glucose, and water delivered to the patient. You can hydrate the patient rapidly enough to counter balance the amount of loss of fluid due to diarrhea. The thing is that you should remember is that the feces that is coming out, that is the diarrhea, the fecal material is going to be very watery, but is always always always isotonic to the body. So, it's going to have 300 milliosmolar solution. And the amount the concentration of the sodium and the chloride that's within that fecal material is going to add up to the 300 milliosmoles. The other type of diarrhea, is the one that I was alluding to, and that is the lactose intolerance that we have an individual that cannot break down lactose. The osmotically active lactose is delivered to the colon, and that causes water to enter into the lumen of the colon. And under these conditions, again, the fecal material will be 300 milliosmoles, because again, it's always isotonic. But when you add up the amount of sodium, that is the concentration of sodium, and the concentration of chloride that is within that fecal material, it will be less than 250 milliosmoles. And that's due to the presence of this other osmotic material, which is what's holding the water and and causing the underlying diarrhea. So I want you to think about which of these two conditions could you discriminate by having an individual who has diarrhea and you say to that individual, you prevent them from drinking or from eating any material. The diarrhea will be lost from that individual under one of these two conditions. So, figure out which on of those two conditions we're talking about. 

Alright, what are our general concepts? First is we have gastric emptying into the duodenum occurs slowly. It's going to occur over four hours and it's going to be about four milliliters per squirt. And this is going to allow for the neutralization of this acidic chyme this is coming into the duodenum. Secondly, hormonal pathways are going to coordinate the secretion of bicarbonate, digestive enzymes, and of insulin into the blood. The bicarbonate and the digestive enzymes are going to move into the digestive tract, that is, into the lumen of the small intestine. These things (bicarbonate, the digestive enzymes and the insulin) being secreted by the pancreas. And also we're going to have a secretion of bile from the bile duct from the gallbladder. And that's going to be under the direction of CCK (or cholecystokinin), this hormone. Third, we're going to have digestion of complex food to small molecules, and this is going to occur within the lumen. This is going to be outside of the cells, and this is going to occur all along the small intestine, but predominantly within the duodenum, in the jujenum and the early portions of the ileum. And four, the small intestine is the major site for the absorption of nutrients, solutes, and water. And in particular, the ileum is going to be really important for the uptake of of water. And five, we have the lumenal contents of the small and large intestine is isotonic at all times. That means that it is going to be 300 milliosmolar at all times. Alright, so the next time we come in, we're going to talk about motility along the tract, and how the tract is able to move materials from one compartment to the other. Okay, so see you then.
