# 9-4 GI: Motility  
Welcome. This is our last lecture on the GI tract. Today, we want to talk about motility and how we move materials through the GI tract. So if you recall, we've been talking about the gastrointestinal tract, or GI tract, as a processing plant where we start in the mouth and we digest the materials in the next compartment, which is in the stomach and in the small intestines. And then, move materials into the lower portion of the intestine where we're absorbing most of our fluids and our nutrients. And then, move into the colon (the large intestinal region) where we are absorbing a lot of the fluids. And so, this is a unidirectional movement through the tract. 

And what's important is we have a timed event. So that there are sufficient amounts of time for digestion to occur, and for absorption to occur before the materials then exit from the body as the feces (fecal material). Motility then is going to govern this timing as we're moving along the tube. So let's consider first the general anatomy of the tube. 

As you recall from our first lecture that in this particular series that we have on the outermost aspect of the gastrointestinal tract or tube, we have two layers of smooth muscle and that's what's shown here. The smooth muscle is said to be in the muscularis externa. The muscularis externa has these two layers the inner most layer is circumferential around the lumen of the tube, and the outermost layer is longitudinally-oriented along the long axis of the tube. When we contract this circular muscle, the circular layer or the inner layer, if that contacts, it will make the lumen of the tubes smaller, and if it relaxes, then the lumen of the tube increases. In contrast, when we contract the outermost layer, the tube will shorten, and it will shorten in regions or segments along the tube. The from the time that we enter into the esophagus to the time that we leave the tube, most of this muscle is going to be smooth muscle. It starts in the in the lower 1/3 of the esophagus and moves all the way through to to the end of the large intestine. This is all smooth muscle, and the smooth muscle is the single unit type smooth muscle, where all of the cells are going to be connected to one another through gap junctions, so they're electrically coupled cells. The activity of the two layers of muscle have to be coordinated, and this coordination is done by a local nervous system which is called the enteric nervous system, and that is what shown here. So, the enteric nervous system is located between the two muscle layers. The enteric nervous system effectively governs the mortality along the tract independent of the central nervous system. The central nervous system can modulate this activity through other branches of the autonomic nervous system, and that is the parasympathetic and the sympathetic nervous system. Now, there's another factor that we have to consider when we talking about motility of the smooth muscle through this tract. And that is that there is located within the tract, within the fundic region of the stomach, within the small intestine and within the large intestine, specialized smooth muscle cells which are called pacemakers. And like all pacemakers, they have an unstable resting membrane potential and that's what's shown here. So in our top image, we have the cells are slowly depolarizing. And then they repolarize, and then again, slowly repolarize. As the cells are slowly repolarizing, depolarizing and repolarizing, they're generating what is called the electrical slow-waves. These electrical slow-waves then bring the resting membrane potential of the smooth muscle cells, of these pacemaker cells, close to threshold, and at that point, we can initiate an action potential. And if the action potential is initiated, it means we've reached the voltage at which the voltage-gated calcium channels open. The voltage-gated calcium channels open, calcium enters the cells, and action potential is generated. To repolarize the cells, we then close the voltage-gated calcium channels and open a voltage-gated potassium channel, and that then repolarizes the cells. Within the intestines, that is, within the small intestine and the large intestine, every one of these electrical slow-waves is not associated with an action potential. Only those that reach threshold and will generate the action potential. But those that generate the action potential, will be followed by a contraction. So, wherever we have an action potential generated, there would be a contraction of the smooth muscle. Within the stomach, this is not true. So within the stomach, as we have these rhythmic slow-waves, the rhythmic slow-waves actually can give rise to a contraction. So within the stomach, you don't have to generate an action potential, but the threshold of the slow-wave is associated with, with contraction. There's one other thing about these slow-waves, and that is that the slow-wave determines the frequency of the action potential, and therefore, the frequencies of the contraction, but then the slow-waves can be modulated. That is the timing of the pacemaker cells can be modulated by the sympathetic system and by the parasympathetic system. The sympathetic nervous system will cause a hyperpolarization of these cells, and move this resting membrane potential of the pacemaker cell further from threshold. This simply means that it takes a longer time for the cells to be able to reach threshold, and eventually, to fire off an action potential. So the sympathetic nervous system then delays the ability of the cell to reach a threshold and to generate an action potential, and therefore, delays contraction. The converse is true of the parasympathetic system. The parasympathetic system moves the resting membrane potential towards threshold, so it's fast. The cells reach threshold at a faster pace. And by reaching threshold at a faster pace, they can then generate an action potential and contraction, so we can speed up contractions by having input from the parasympathetic system. 

Now, what kinds of motility are we actually talking about? So, in the fed state, you have two types of motility. The motility that we're going to talk about first is called segmentation, or a mixing type of motility. In segmentation, we have two neighboring regions of the tract, where the first is relaxed, and we have a food bolus within that region. And the second is contracted and has no food within the region. The first will contract and the second relaxes, and that moves the food bolus, then to the second chamber. And then, as the second chamber contracts, the first then opens, relaxes again, and so we have this sloshing of material back and forth. This kind of movement or segmentation or mixing movement is very critical for mixing the materials (the food substances) with the enzymes, with the buffers, and all of the secretions that we have added to the lumens of the tract. In addition to that, it's also mixing the material with the surfaces of the epithelial cells that are lining this track and enhancing the absorption of the nutrients that we have generated. So, the small amino acids, the small sugars, and so forth are now being delivered to the surfaces of these cells, and they can then be absorbed by these cells. The sloshing back and forth between segments, or segmentation, is using the inner muscle mass of the tract. So it's the inner muscle mass that constricts, closing the first the lumen of the first chamber, and then its the inner muscle mass that relaxes and allows the second chamber to receive the food bolus. And so the sloshing back and forth then is due to the inner muscle masses changes in inner muscle masses. The second type of movement is called peristalsis, and that's where we're moving from one region of the tube to the second region of the tube. And then, to a third region of the tube, and so forth. In order to do this, again, we're going to have a contraction and a relaxation event occurring. But we're now going to contract the outermost muscle mass. The outermost muscle mass shortens, and the innermost muscle mass has to relax, so that, as we shorten the tube, the tube will get fatter. This will occur in segments as we're going as we precede from from the beginning towards the anus. So from the mouth towards the anus, we will have peristalsis or this segmental movement of the food bolus. It's a progressive movement as we go along the entire tract. And again, the waves of motility for both the segments, segmentation and peristalsis is going to be set not only by the interactactivity of the enteric nervous system, but also by the pacemakers. And so, it's the combination of those two signals which will generate our timing for the movement of the material as we move along the tract. 

Now, in the fasting state, we also have a type of peristalsis, but it's different in timing from that which we see when food is present within the lumen of the gastrointestinal tube. This particular type of movement is propulsive movement. It's going to be moving materials from one region, that is from the stomach, towards the anus. And it's called the migratory motor complex. Migratory motor complex is sort of a good housekeeping type of movement. And in this case, what it's doing is sweeping clean the entire tract during the fasting period. So, it's sweeping clean any food debris or nutrients that may have been left behind. This is a very important type of activity because if these materials are left within the tract, you can have bacterial growth or overgrowth within the tract, and that can lead to a painful situation. It could lead to diarrhea, it could lead to nausea, and it could lead to vomiting. These migratory motor complexes are initiated, not by our pacemaker cells, but by the hormone motilin. This hormone is secreted in the absence of food within the lumen of the stomach. It's also secreted by the duodenum and by the intestine the jejunum of the small intestines in the absence of food. Motilin then will initiate the contractile events both within the stomach as well as within the intestines. The migratory motor complex usually starts in the stomach, but it can initiate in the duodenum or in the jejunum. And the frequency of contractions, as I said, is going to be different from this frequency of contractions that we saw with the peristalsis that was present when we had food present within the lumen. Now, there are regions which are isolated from one another and, as you know, we isolate the stomach, which has a very caustic acidic acid (hydrochloric acid) in it, from the duodenum and from the esophagus because these latter two regions are not protected from the caustic actions of the acid. These regions that are isolated by sphincters. These sphincters are not under voluntary control. These are sphincters which are under involuntary control, and it's due to the tonic inhibition of the smooth muscle, And is again the the inner circular layer of the smooth muscle, the muscularis externis. So when we contracted that smooth muscle layer, we can include the lumen of the tube. We open it at very small amounts between the the pylorus region of the stomach and the duodenum to allow very small amounts of our acidic chyme to enter into the duodenum. So we have a regulated opening of that region. And so, that means that we have to, for relaxation of the sphincter, we have to release the inhibition that the sphincter is contracted under an inhibitory activity. We release that inhibition and allow the sphincter to relax, so that this, so that the there's is a small lumen through which the acidic chyme can exit. This is a regulated relaxation. And it's by turning off this tonic inhibition that we're then able to then open the sphincter. Very small amounts are ejected from the stomach into the duodenum. And this is really important because if we have a very large amount of acidic chyme or for instance, a hypotonic solution coming from the stomach into the duodenum. You can then get water moving into the duodenum from osmotic action, and what that will do is stretch the duodenum, and that's going to be very painful. So this is a regulated exiting of material at this point. We also have regulated openings of these sphincters. There's a second sphincter, not only at the pipe. There's a sphincter between the esophagus and the stomach, and between the stomach and the duodenum, but there's also one between the ileum and the colon. And these regulated openings then are allowing the receiving section region of the tube to be able to handle the material that's being that's being delivered. We have regulated openings in respond to the migrating motor complex as well. And that is between meals, so that when we're sweeping clean the intestine of any debris or any nutrients, then, at that time, we will open periodically the sphincters to allow the materials to pass, and then the sphincters will close again. There is no time in which the sphincters are all patently open along the tract. 

So what about mass movements? Now, mass movements is where we have waves of contractions that are occurring within the large intestine. And here, we're now propelling the fecal material through the large intestine toward the rectum and the anus. The waves of contraction are not two peristaltic waves in the sense they are not using the outer layer of smooth muscle that we were talking about in the muscularis externis. But instead, it's using the inner layer of the circumferentially-oriented muscle layer of the muscularis externis. So we have contraction, then we're essentially contracting a part of the chamber. We've contracted, and then, we relax to receive it. And again, it's sort of almost like the segmentation type of movement, but it's propulsive. This has a special name. It's called mass movements. It occurs about 1 to 3 times per day under normal circumstances, and that it's then moving the materials to the anal canal. The anal canal has an involuntary sphincter, and we have an external sphincter at the anus, which is voluntary. The mass movement, you are all are familiar with is that you have the sensation that you need to go to the bathroom, but it may not be appropriate. And so you don't, nothing happens and you're able to retain the fecal material until you can get to the bathroom, and then eliminate it, and you're eliminating it under voluntary control. The elimination of the fecal material from the body is called defecation. It's simply expelling the fecal material from the body. And it occurs with relaxation of the voluntary anal sphincter. That's the external sphincter and then, also an increase in the intra-abdominal pressure to push the material out from the body. 

Alright, so one thing that we haven't talked about is vomiting. We talked about diarrhea in the last lecture. And here, I wanted to just to spend some time talking about vomiting. I'm pretty sure everybody has experienced vomiting at some point in time. Vomiting is a protective function where if you're bringing in some type of toxic material into the body, then the body expels the material from the stomach. The stomach content being expelled back out through the mouth. This can also be triggered by either delayed emptying of the stomach or by rapid emptying of the stomach. In the delayed emptying of the stomach, we have material that sort of stays in the stomach, let's say for instance, from a very fatty meal. And it's retained and retained and retained for several hours, and eventually the body just expels through the mouth. And the other one is where we have this very rapid emptying of the stomach content into the duodenal, and again as I said, then you can have a very rapid swelling of the duodenal region due to the movement of water coming into this region to titrate the hypertonic material that is coming from the stomach. This actually has a name and that's called the Dumping Syndrome of the stomach. The vomiting of course, is the expulsion of the chyme from the stomach, but it can be that you can are eliminating material from the beginning of the duodenal. And, and under those conditions, then the vomit it will have a color sort of a greenish color and that's due to the bile which has been delivered from the gallbladder to the duodenum. Vomiting is controlled by the vomiting center, and that center is located in the medulla at the brain stem. It is actually controlling the respiratory muscles and the abdominal muscles. It is not causing a reversed peristalsis of the smooth muscles of the muscularis externis, but instead you are changing the pressure within the inter-thoracic cavity. And then help to move the material, then out from the stomach and out of the mouth. 

Alright, so what's our general concepts? So, the first of the general concepts is that we have movement which involves coordinated activities of the two outer muscle masses of the wall of the gastrointestinal tract. The second general concept is that movement and activities are coordinated by this local nervous system which is called the enteric nervous system. And that this can be modulated from input from both the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. The third is that there are pacemakers cells which generate a spontaneous electrical activity and these are called electrical slow waves. And that these can lead to an action potential which fires at the peak of the depolarization as they're coming up to threshold. And at that point, if you have an action potential, contraction can follow. And this is true throughout the intestine, but in the stomach as vwell. The electrical slow waves can can be associated with contractions directly. The fourth concept is that in the fed state, we have two types of motility. We have segmentation or mixing. and this is allowing the material to slosh back and forth in order to have optimal absorption of the materials. And then we also have peristalsis. And peristalsis is the propulsive movement of the food bolus along the tract. In the fasting state, the migratory motor complex sweeps the tract clean, and this is the propulsive type of movement along the tract. It has very different timing from the peristalsis movement that is associated with feeding. The fifth general concept is that tonic contractions can occur at the sphincters and this closes the sphincters. And in order to have material moving from one segment of the tract to a second, we have to have a relaxation of the sphincter, a slight opening of the sphincter to allow the material to to exit from segment one to segment two. The tonic contractions of the sphincters are going to occur when there's no motility within the tract. And so they will open when there's food within the tract at designated times. And they will also open during the migratory motor complex as we're sweeping the debris, the extra nutrients, from the tract, but that they will be closed at all the other times, and in particular when there is no motility within the GI tract. So this, then, ends our discussion of the GI tract. And the next time we meet, we're going to talk about the urinary system. So see you then. Bye-bye.
