# 8-4 Gonad Estrogen and Progesterone Effects on Target Organs  

Okay, this is our last session of the reproductive system, where we're going to be talking now more about the uterus. We've established what's going to happen in the ovary during the cycle. But now, we need to determine and talk about what's going to happen with the uterus as a result of what's happening in the ovary. So this is just a little bit of a review and kind of putting some of those things that I was talking about into a graphic format, where at the beginning of the cycle, we're going to have fairly high LH and FSH. That is going to lead to the maturation of our follicles, and then we're going to have that one chosen follicle continue to mature, which is then going to produce this large spike in estrogen. This is from that chosen follicle, that increase in estrogen, and is what's going to produce our huge LH surge that's going to trigger ovulation. The follicle now has lost its oocyte, so it's going to switch from producing a lot of estrogen to producing a lot of progesterone as well as estrogen because now it's just the corpus luteum. And then, it waits to see if there's a pregnancy. We'll talk about what happens if there is one. If there isn't one, then the corpus luteum is going to degenerate, which is shown right here, which means our estrogen and progesterone levels are going to fall. And which means now, LH and FSH can increase, which is showing right at the end. So throughout most of the second half of this phase, throughout the luteal phase, [or?] producing lots of progesterone and estrogen, and the fact that we have both estrogen and progesterone that they act synergistically to really decrease LH and FSH production because at the time, by preparing to be pregnant, we don't need more follicles to mature. However, if there is no pregnancy and we get that corpus luteum to degenerate, then estrogen and progesterone decrease, and that's what allows this little increase of LH and FSH to start the new cycle with some follicles to mature. 

So now, remember how we talked about one role of the ovary is to control the uterus. The uterus is not going to be controlled by the hypothalamus and pituitary access directly. So let's talk about what happens. So we talked about how the beginning of the cycle, just by definition, is going to be menstruation, which is going to be when the lining of the uterus is sloughing off. Then with estrogen coming from that chosen follicle, we're going to have proliferation of the lining of the uterus, meaning it's building itself back up in preparation for a possible pregnancy. Having progesterone around, which is what we're going to have after ovulation. And once we have that corpus luteum that's cranking out progesterone and estrogen, it causes the uterus to be in the secretory phase where it's going to be releasing products that are going to allow for a fertilized egg to survive and to implant in the walls of the uterus. So this is the phase where the uterus is ready for pregnancy, which makes sense because we just had ovulation. And this is called the secretory phase of the uterus, but again it's determined whether you've got estrogen versus progesterone, and estrogen and these are coming from the ovary. If there is no pregnancy we talked about how the corpus luteum you is going to degenerate, which is going to mean that our progesterone and estrogen have fallen, and then that means that now were not going to be able to maintain the lining of the uterus, and we're going to have the menstrual phase again. And it's going to slough off to prepare for the next month. 

So now, the question is what happens if we do have a pregnancy? If we have a pregnancy, then the embryo is going to produce a hormone called HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin), which binds to LH receptors. It's very similar to LH, and then is going to bind the LH receptors on the corpus luteum and allow it to remain intact to prevent it from degenerating two weeks after ovulation, which means that it's going to keep producing estrogen and progesterone. So, what that means if we chart the hormones during pregnancy is that here at one month, then is going to be a month after the last menstruation, so this is soon after implantation is when we're going to have this huge spike in HCG, which is going to act on the corpus luteum to keep it going and to prevent it from degenerating, which is why we're going to have estrogen and progesterone still being produced. Because that corpus luteum has not degenerated, estrogen and progesterone is going to keep increasing. But then, you see now HCG goes way down at the end of the first trimester. This is so it should be stopped being produced, which then means that the corpus luteum then starts to regress and degenerate. But yet, you see that we still have increasing and increasing levels of estrogen and progesterone, and this is due to the production of those hormones by the placenta of the forming baby. So those will keep increasing and increasing until delivery where the placenta will also be delivered with the baby, and so there will be a very quick reduction in estrogen and progesterone levels. Another thing to keep in mind is the fact that in the uterus, we're going to first have estrogen. It's going to be exposed to the estrogen coming from that chosen follicle, and then it's going to be exposed to estrogen and progesterone coming from the corpus luteum. And so to understand how they regulate one another, makes sense then because estrogen, when it's expressed by itself, is going to increase the number of estrogen receptors, as well as progesterone receptors. So that means, when that chosen follicle is cranking all those that estrogen, then in the uterus, estrogen receptors are going to be increased in expression as well as progesterone receptors, so this is priming of the uterus, getting it ready for the next phase, which is going to be when progesterone is made along with estrogen. And so, in that way, it's making the uterus more sensitive to those before it's exposed to the progesterone. Then, once the progesterone is made, it's going to reduce the number of estrogen receptors because now we don't need that proliferation. We are just having a differentiation in the secretory phase, and so we don't need an increase in estrogen receptors anymore. So this explains why women, particularly ones who have a uterus, cannot be given only estrogen for long periods of time because if you are given estrogen by itself for long periods of time, then you're increasing the number of estrogen receptors and only exposed to estrogen, and then that can lead to proliferation that's out of control, which is basically cancer. So, you have to be very careful if people are given estrogen by themselves, particularly if they have a uterus. That's very estrogen responsive. 

We're going to finish up talking about oral contraceptives because they show how you can kind of tinker with this hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis to accomplish something. So, birth control pills started out being mostly progesterone, which by itself will depress the hypothalamus-pituitary axis, but there is a little bit of estrogen that was actually a contaminant in the beginning experiments, and estrogen and progesterone together actually are more potent at depressing that axis. So that was in the 1960's, then later in the 1980's, they were able to use synthetic progesterone and estrogen which lasts longer in the body, and so then they could make pills with smaller doses of hormone. And those are similar to a lot of the pills that are produced today. So this action of progesterone and estrogen on the axis is going to reduce FSH and LH production, which is going to prevent ovulation in most cases. However, there some other changes in the uterus and the oviduct (fallopian tubes) that can also prevent fertilization, and another important effect is to alter the mucous that's in the cervix, which is in the opening of the beginning part of the uterus that prevents sperm form entering. So, that's also a very important aspect that some certain types of birth control pills may not prevent ovulation every month, but this alteration of the mucus is another important effect that will also make sure that pregnancy doesn't occur. 

So our key concepts to wrap up the reproductive sessions is that we're going to have the estrogen from that chosen follicle that's going to put the uterus in the proliferate phase, and then the progesterone that's going to be in the corpus luteum that's going to be important for the secretory phase to prepare the uterus for implantation of the embryo. And then if we do get implantation, the HCG is going to act on the corpus luteum to maintain it for the first three months. Then it's going to degenerate, but then the placenta is going to take over to keep producing lots of estrogen and progesterone. So we're going to have a major depression of FSH and LH production because of all this estrogen and progesterone. Even though we have high estrogen, like you might see with the LH surge because we have progesterone that's pathway, the H-P axis is going to be reduced. And that's the H-P axis is also going to be depressed with oral contraceptive use.
