# 8-5 Fuel Homeostasis: Fed State & Insulin  

Greetings. Today, we want to talk about how the body uses fuel, and the types of regulation that we have to employ in order to move from a fasted state to a fed state, and back to a fasted state. So, the first things that we're going to do is we're going to talk about the hormones secreted from an organ which is called the pancreas. And this is going to give us our daily movement for our minute to minute movement. And there's two hormones, one is insulin and the other is glucagun. And then, we're going to describe the relationship between the blood glucose concentration and the amount of insulin that's going to be secreted to this signal. And then thirdly, we want to talk about the major target organs for insulin, and its effect on these target cells. And then five, we're going to discuss some of the pathological states that occur when we have an insufficiency in the amount of insulin which is being secreted from the body. So today, we're going to look at insulin. And then the next time we come in here, we're going to talk about glucagon. And insulin and glucagon form sort of an opposing reflex loop, and so we'll deal with the very shortly. But then move on just to talk about insulin. 

So, why do we we need fuel? We need fuel in order to generate energy for our current activities. We also need fuel so that we can acquire substrates that we can store and then use them during times where we're between meals or when we're in fasting positions. And then thirdly, we need fuel so that we can have turnover of tissue. So there are lots of tissues in the body that need to be repaired or we have growth. And during those periods of time, we need to have some kind of fuel. The body, of course, is going to have an energy state which is in mass balance. So, it is going to try to control its energy state to maintain a mass balance. So, we have our energy intake, and it's going to be equal to the output. And under those condition then, we would not gain weight and we will be in a neutral balance. But in the conditions where we bring in more fuel than what we use, we would be in a positive balance and we would gain weight. And under conditions where we use more of our fuel than what we bring in, then of course, we will lose and that we would be in a negative balance. In addition to these hormones which are going to be changing our metabolism, the body also uses hormones to regulate the intake of fuel, and that is through feeding. And the feeding excess we haven't really talked about directly. Indirectly, when we talked about the thyroid hormone, but the feeding excess is governed also by hormones, and one of those hormones is insulin. This is the hormone we're going to talk about today. 

When insulin rises in the blood, it turns off feeding because it's an indication that we have a lot of fuel, and you would now feel satiated. When insulin levels fall, then we have the converse, and it then promotes feeding. Okay, so let's look at this the reflex, the two different states that we have for fasting and fed. The fed state is called an anabolic state. This is when we've just eaten meals, and the food is coming in from the GI tract. It's going to be delivered by the blood to the liver. And, and the types of fuel substances that are going to be delivered to the liver are going to be sugars, glucose, amino acids and fats. As they come into the liver, the liver can store this material as glycogen, which is a very labile form of carbohydrate. Or the amino acids can be stored in muscles so we can increase muscle mass. Where we store the fats is in fat tissue, or adipose tissue. Under these conditions, it's said to be an anabolic state because we are building tissues. The converse of this is, of course, when we are fasting, that is between meals when food is not being brought into the body. And now, we reverse these mechanisms, and we break down fat to form fatty acids plus the glycerol, and this now is delivered to the liver, and the liver then will form glucose and ketones. The and actually secrete this into the plasma so that it can be delivered to the cells for fuel. The muscle can be degraded, although this is a very expensive fuel source. The muscle can be degraded to amino acids and the amino acids, in turn, can be converted by the liver into plasma glucose. The liver itself can degrade glycogen and form, then again, plasma glucose. So, plasma glucose levels will rise due to the activity of the liver, and the glucose is one of the predominant fuel sources for the brain. So, this is one of the major food sources that the brain is going to use. But the liver can also form these ketones, and the ketones are actually acids. So, these are ketotic acids. And the brain is also able to use the ketotic acids. The brain is a rather specialized area of the body, that is the brain itself does not store any fuel. So, the brain is always dependent on the amount of glucose which is delivered from the blood, on the ketotic acids, or ketones as a fuel source. 

So, how do we switch from an anabolic to a metabolic pathway? And this is done on a minute to minute basis. It's going to be maintained by insulin and glucagon, these two hormones which are coming from the pancreas. And they're coming from a specific region in the pancreas called the pancreatic islets. So these pancreatic islets secrete insulin and glucagon, and they will do so in response to a substrate. So the substrate is usually glucose, and we'll talk about this reflex in a second. But that's the dominant signal for when we either turn on insulin, or we turn on glucagon. We also have conditions where we have stress energy, that is energy that we need in order to run away from the dinosaur, or to run away from some type of pursuer. These are our flight or fight responses. And as we said earlier, this is going to be maintained by cortisol and epinephrine, which are both coming from the adrenal glands and glucagon, which is going to be coming from the pancreas. And we're going to deal with glucagon when we come in here for the next lecture. We also can have growth hormone, which can help under stress to increase blood glucose levels. And then in the long term, for starvation, we use the thyroid hormone. And the thyroid hormones, under conditions where we have restricted fuel or at starvation conditions, it decreases the basal metabolic rate of all the tissues of the body so that we are not burning fuel at a high rate. And we move from a T3 state to a T4 state. 

So, what does this reflex loop look like then for this minute to minute regulation of fuels? The minute to minute regulation of fuels, as we said, is going to be governed by insulin and by glucagon. Both of these hormones are secreted by the islet cells of the pancreas. The beta cells are secreting insulin. The alpha cells are secreting glucagon. When plasma glucose levels rise, as in a fed state, plasma glucose levels rise, and they rise above 100 milligrams per deciliter, then insulin is secreted. Insulin will have two separate target sites. The first target site is on the liver, and it will cause the liver then to store glucose. It's second target sites are areas of the body which are going to store fuels as well. And these are going to be skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. And in these areas, they have a receptor which is going to be acitivated. The insulin receptor is activated. And that receptor, in turn, causes the transferring of a glucose transporter from the cytoplasm of the cells out to the plasma membrane, and then glucose can enter into these two tissue types at a very rapid rate. So, it's moving then or mobilizing the GLUT transporters out onto the cell surface, and glucose enters. Glucose is then stored within the muscle or within the adipose tissue. And the effect of these two separate separate actions by insulin will cause a decrease in plasma glucose levels. The decrease in plasma glucose levels obviously takes care of our initiating stimulus, and we now have our negative feedback loop. But you notice it seems that there's a second feedback loop, which is connected to insulin. And that is when the plasma glucose levels fall, and if they fall to less than 80 milligrams per deciliter, then it will feedback and activate the alpha cells of the pancreas. The alpha cells will secrete the hormone glucagon. And glucagon will do the converse from what we saw was happening with insulin. Glucagon will mobilize fuel and actually raise the plasma glucose levels. One other thing to notice about this reflex loop is that when we have insulin, insulin is actively inhibiting the secretion of glucagon from the alpha cell. So, insulin is the dominant hormone and it prevents the glucagon from be released from the alpha cell under normal conditions. 

So, what about these beta cells? So, the beta cells of the pancreas, I've diagramed here. The beta cell is a cell that's counting the amount of glucose that's within the blood. So, it's like a little bean counter. The glucose enters the cells through transporter, the Glu transporter. And as it comes into the cell, it gets trapped, and then it gets used to make ATP. And that's what shown here. So, as this glucose enters, ATP levels will rise within these cells and the ATP is going to close a potassium channel. This potassium channel is gated by ATP. When we close the potassium channel, the cells will depolarize. And as the cells depolarize, we open a voltage-gated calcium channel and calcium enters. That raises intracellular calcium. And you all know that when you raise intracellular calcium, we get a secretion event. And so, the little stored vesicles that are sitting here in the cytoplasm and which have insulin inside, and insulin is a peptide hormone, the insulin will then be secreted. So, the system is secreting the amount of insulin to match the amount of glucose which is sensed within the blood. And as we see, there are conditions where the beta cell is not responding correctly to insulin, and these are going to be called diabetic mellitus type individuals. People who have a problem with governing glucose levels within the blood. And under some of these conditions or instances, we'll see that the beta cells actually can be promoted to secrete more insulin by giving a drug which will close the ATP-gated potassium channels. And this drug is called Sulfonylurea. So, we give Sulfonylureas to people who have diabetes type 2 who have an insufficiency of secretion of insulin, and that causes the cells to secrete more insulin. So, that's one of your target sites then for treating patients. The beta cell is not just sensitive to glucose levels. So the primary target or primary substrate that is regulating the beta cell is in fact blood glucose, but it will also be responding to plasma amino acid levels. So, a rise in plasma amino acids will cause a secretion of insulin. So, these are positive factors. The beta cell is regulated in a feed forward manner by the GI track. And as the food is arriving into the GI track, the GI track secretes a hormone which is called glucagon-like peptide. The glucagon-like peptide primes the beta cell to secrete more insulin. It doesn't cause it to secrete insulin by itself, but it will cause it to secrete more insulin. It sort of portentiates the activity of the gland in response to either amino acids or into glucose. This feed forward also occurs through the parasympathetic nervous system. And that is as you smell food or you think about food, or you start to taste food as, as food is starting to arrive within the GI tract, there is a feed forward to the pancreas by the parasympathetic nervous system, which then is telling the islets, the beta cells, that get ready because food is coming. And so they, again, we will have a potentiation of the secretion of insulin from the beta cell in respond to parasympathetic activity. So again, the feed forwards from the GI tract and the feed forwards from the parasympathetic nervous system are positive factors. Now, we do have a negative factor. Negative regulation of the beta cell does occur and it's mediated by the sympathetic nervous system. Under conditions of stress, when we have a high sympathetic drive, then the sympathetic nervous system inhibits the secretion of insulin. And as we'll see, when it inhibits the secretion of insulin, that removes the inhibition to glucagon, and now the alpha cells will secrete glucagon. So, that's how we get our yin-yang between these two interconnecting reflex loops. 

So, what are the target cells? So, the insulin receptor is present on three target cells: muscle, liver and adipose tissue (or fat). The receptor is sitting on the surface of the cells. It's a receptor that's going to be binding a protein, which is insulin. So, the insulin binds to the receptor, and then it mediates or transduces the signal to the interior of the cell as a tyrosine kinase activation. So, we're getting a second messenger signalling to the interior of the cell. It's a very complicated second messenger signaling, but one of the important parts of it is that it recruits a glucose transporter. A GLUT 4 from being sequestered in the inside of the cell out to the plasma membrane. And once it's inserted into the plasma membrane, the GLUT 4 transporter allows glucose to enter the cells rapidly, and this is going to occur in both skeletal muscle and in fat cells. And we will store the gluclose and clear it quickly from the plasma. In addition, we are going to have the insulin receptor present on the liver. And the insulin receptor on the liver is going to cause the liver to store fat and glycogen. So, in the liver, it's going to, again, have glucose coming into the cells and we're going to store our glucose as glycogen. 

So, how do we know if this whole system is working correctly? You all know that when you go into the doctor's office, they ask you if you've had overnight fasting. And when they're looking for overnight fasting and then they take a blood draw, what they're looking for is what the circulating levels of glucose are within your plasma. Under normal overnight fasting conditions, you should have between 180 and 100 micrograms per deciliter. If they're prediabetic, that is a person who has a pathological condition where they're not dealing with glucose quite correctly, then these levels are 100 to 125 micrograms per deciliter. And then, an individual who is a diabetic will have 126 or higher micrograms per deciliter. The other test that the physician can give to his patient is that he can ask how the glucose is actually being handled by the cells of the body. And this is what's done an oral glucose tolerance test. In an oral glucose tolerance test, the individual's asked to drink to a bit of syrup, which is a very high concentration of glucose. If it's a normal person, they start off with a fasting blood glucose level, which is about 80 to 100 micrograms per deciliter. And as they drink this syrup, their plasma glucose levels rise to about 100 to less than 150 by one hour, and then or back down by two hours to baseline. So, this would be our normal individual. And that the rise in the plasma glucose is to about 140. Now, if the individual is a diabetic, then that individual, first of all, has a much higher fasting level of glucose when they come into the office. They could have 200 or higher. So, let's say our individual has 200 for his fasting plasma glucose level. If he drinks this bowl of subglucose, then what happens is that the glucose levels within the plasma rise. And they stay very high for over four hours before coming back down to normal. So that the diabetic individual then, not only has a much greater rise in plasma glucose, but that the rise in plasma glucose is not resolved quickly. And that it stays high over a period of four hours, and that's what's shown here. Eventually, the glucose then is secreted from the body into by wasting it, by removing it through the kidneys. 

There are, in fact, two different types of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes mellitus simply means that when the Greeks tasted the urine, it tasted sweet and so it's mellitus. So, in diabetes mellitus, there's glucose in the urine. The problem with diabetes is that there's too little glucose inside our cells and there's too much glucose outside the cells. So, as we saw, the fasting glucose levels can be quite high, 126 or greater. The consequence of that is that there's not enough fuel inside the cells and that there's too much glucose on the outside, and that's changing the osmotic balance within the body. The individual is eating, but that the fuel is not useful to the individual, and instead they're peeing it out through the kidney into the urine. There are two types of diabetes. One is diabetes type 1, which is insulin-dependent diabetes. And under these conditions, the individual has lost the function of the beta cells. So, the beta cells of the pancreas are no longer responding to glucose. And in fact, usually, there's an apoptosis (or a cell death) of these beta cells, and the beta cells themselves are missing in the individual. They obviously have insulin insufficiency. They can't secrete insulin because the cell that makes insulin is missing, and so these individuals then require insulin for replacement therapy. So what are some of the symptoms that you would have? I have a really good friend who's a diabetic type 1 and has been since he was 8 years old. This individual has a son who, when he turned 35, all the sudden said that he was eating and eating and eating, but he was losing weight dramatically and he had no energy. His father asked him whether he was drinking a lot and peeing a lot. And the son said yes, he's very thirsty and he's drinking all the time, but that he's also peeing a lot. And so, the father asked him to be tested for diabetes. Because what's happening is that the glucose, instead of being used by the cells, is being delivered to the kidney, and it's maxing out all the transporters for glucose in the kidney. And so, much of it is staying inside the tubule's lumens of the kidney. It's staying in the presumptive urine, and it's holding water because it's osmotically active. And that means there's an increase in the amount of urine that's being put out, an increase in the volume, as well as loss of glucose from the body. So, this is osmotic diuresis. This individual, when he went in to be tested, actually had 350 milligrams per deciliter for his fasting overnight glucose levels, so definitely, a very high fasting overnight glucose levels. They gave him an insulin pump, and now he's fine. And so, his levels are titrated and he has lost all of the symptoms of diabetes. The second type of individual is a type 2 individual. In this case, they're not dependent on insulin. They may have an insulin insufficiency, and usually these individuals will start out with a insulin insufficiency, and that's due to this slower response by the beta cell. The beta cell it's not counting the amount of glucose correctly, so we have much higher circulating levels of glucose than normal. These individuals initially can be treated with things such as the Sulfonylurea drugs which allow the beta cell to secrete more insulin and to be able to meet the demands of the higher glucose. But eventually, the diabetic type 2's often will have what's known as receptors resistance. And this is the insulin target cells, and particularly, the skeletal muscles and also in the fat that the receptors will bind insulin, but they don't transduce to the interior of the cells correctly. So that those GLUT 4 transporters are not moved out on to the cells move out onto the cell's surface, and we don't then clear the glucose from the blood quickly. The insulin receptor resistant diabetic can have very high circulating levels of glucose. They can even have high circulating levels of insulin, but the receptors are not recognizing the insulin, and therefore they're not clearing the glucose rapidly. So, two different types of diabetes, and in each case, we have high circulating levels of glucose, and in some cases, high circulating levels also of insulin and and receptor resistance. 

So, our key concepts. So, the first is that we have energy from the diet, and this must be used immediately or stored. Secondly, we have hormones that are going to control metabolic pathways. The anabolic pathway, or anabolic metabolism, dominates in our fed state, and this is when we're building tissues and storing fuel. And the catabolic metabolism dominates in the fasting state. Thirdly, insulin and the ratio of insulin to glucagon regulates the minute to minute metabolism. Insulin promotes our fuel storage. It's an anabolic hormone. It's promoting anabolism where we are storing fuel. Glucagon promotes fuel mobilization. It's a catabolic hormone, and so we are degrading material, or degrading tissue to liberate fuel. The beta cells of the pancreas secrete insulin, and their secretion is regulated by substrates, such as amino acid and glucose. They're also regulated in a positive manner by the parasympathetic nervous system, and this is a feed forward regulation where just the thinking of food will cause a potentiation of the insulin secretion. And then, they're also negatively regulated by the sympathetic, so this is a negative regulation. And then lastly, diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease. In type 1 diabetics, they have insulin insuffiency and must be given insulin. They are not capable of generating insulin because they've lost the pancreatic beta cells. And in the type 2 diabetics, they may have an insulin insufficiency in that they're not generating enough of the insulin. Or they could have a situation where they have a receptor resistance within the target tissues. Okay, so the next time we come in here, we're going to talk about glucagon, which is the opposing action to insulin. So, see you then.
