# 4-5 Reflex Control  

Greetings. So this is going to be our last discussion of the cardiovascular system. And what we want to do today is to talk about the entire control of the cardiovascular system, and this is going to include, then, our central integrator, as well as the sensors which are bringing afferent information into the integrator, and the effectors, which are actually regulating the activity of the system. So the first thing that we need to look at then is the reflex loop. So the reflex loop, the integration center is shown here. The integration center is called the cardiovascular control center, and it's located within the medulla of the brain stem. This is outside of the area which is cognitive activity, but is found here within the neck. Input to the cardiovascular center is going to be coming from sensors which are present within the periphery as well as in the central locations of the body. This is going to give us information about pressures and volume. So this is feeding into this integration center, and depending upon the type of information that comes in, the integration center will send out a response through our effectors. And the effectors will be the parasympathetic system and the sympathetic nervous system. For instance, if the pressure is sensed that it's fallen within the body itself, than we have low cardiac output, or low pressure, low in arterial pressure, then the medulla (the cardiac control center) will activate the sympathetic drive. And when it activates the sympathetic drive, then the sympathetic nervous system will release norepinephrine. It will drive on the heart. It will drive the beta 1 adrenergic receptors which will increase heart rate. And it also will effect stroke volume, because it will effect the contractility, increase the contractility of the heart, so both heart rate and stroke volume will increase. In addition the sympathetic drive will bring in a hormone which is called epinephrine, and this hormone is coming from the adrenal medulla. So sympathetic drive activates a secretion from the medulla of the adrenal gland to give us epinephrine, and epinephrine, just like norepinephrine, combines to adrenergic receptors and it binds to the beta 1 adrenergic receptors within the heart. So it will then increase heart rate. In addition, it will bind to the alpha-1 adrenergic receptors which are present on the vasculature, and that increases venous return, so we're going to get a larger stroke volume. If on the other hand, we have an increase in pressure, which is shown here, now the pressure is increasing within the system, the central cardiac control center is going to activate the parasympathetic system. When we activate the parasympathetic system, acetylcholine is released, and it binds then to the muscarinic receptors on the heart. The muscarinic receptors will decrease heart rate, and by decreasing heart rate, we will decrease cardiac output. So these two systems then, the sympathetic system and the parasympathetic system, work in an antagonistic manner in order to regulate the pressures within the entire body. Now, one of the major sensors that's present within this system is called the baroreceptor. And the barorecptors are located within the carotid sinus, that is within the carotids that are taking blood up to the head, as well as in the aortic arch. When they sense, the baroreceptors sense change in pressure within the system. And they respond to pressure change because the baroreceptors are mechano-sensing receptors where the stretch of the blood vessel will  increase their firing, and the relaxation or the shrinking of the vessel will actually decrease their firing. So when we have increased pressure, we will have increased firing of the baroreceptors, and this is going to decrease sympathetic tone. So the baroreceptors act as a brake on the sympathetic system, so and when you have high pressures, the baroreceptors turn off the sympathetic drive, and they will turn on the parasympathetic drive. Conversely, when we have a decrease in the mean arterial pressure, we have decrease firing of the baroreceptors, and this is then going to lead to an increase in sympathetic tone, and we will decrease parasympathetic drive. So the baroreceptors then, their firing, will go in the same direction as the increase or decrease in pressure. So an increase in pressure, increase firing of the baroreceptors, decrease pressure, decrease firing of the baroreceptors. And if you remember that the baroreceptors are the break, then if you increase their firing, then that will increase their ability to break the sympathetic's innervation, that is to decrease the sympathetic innervation. Now, in addition to the baroreceptors, which are working in a sort of minute to minute basis, we have other sensors that are present within the body, and these are again located within the periphery of the body. One of these is called the arterial chemoreceptors, and they sense CO2, oxygen levels and pH. These arterial chemoreceptors will feedback this information to the cardiovascular system, but it also feeds the information to the respiratory control center, and the two control centers are located very close to one another within the medulla of the brain stem. So these signals are going to integrate both the activity of the respiratory system and the cardiovascular system. So under the condition where we have, for instance, a rise in CO2, rise in CO2 levels will increase heart rate, so we're going to be delivering more oxygen then to the systems (to the tissues), but it's also going to increase the respiratory rate. So we increase our breathing, and the depth of breathing will go up, so more oxygen is being delivered into the body, and then we're increasing heart rate in order to deliver that oxygen into the tissues. The hypothalamus is also a control center for blood pressure. And when it does, it can control the temperature of the body. So the hypothalamus under conditions where the body is very warm, the hypothalamus will cause vasodilation of all of the capillaries which are present underneath the epidermis which is under your skin. And it then allows the heat to radiate away from the body as it's bringing the blood close to the surface. Under conditions where you're cold, the cardiovascular system will constrict, so you have a constriction, and we will not be perfusing underneath the skin, and we will have the converse where the blood is now kept more towards the core of the body, and is kept warm. And you can actually readily see this, if you go out on a hot day and you start running, your face gets very red, you get flushed, okay, even your arms and your legs can become very red, and this is because the blood is now closer to the surface and you're trying to radiate the heat. When you go out in the snow, you get very cold, and you can get very pale, and sometimes, people will even will get ischemia within their fingertips, and this is due to the retraction of blood away from the surface. The last is that the kidney can control the fluid volume within the body. And what happens here is that the kidney, under conditions where we have a low cardiac output for instance, the kidney can hold volume, and as it holds volume in the body to raise the blood pressure, this volume can then be delivered back to the heart, and so we could have an excess of volume coming back to the heart. And under this condition, we're decreasing our loss of fluid from the body, and this is using a hormone which is called anti-diuretic hormone, which is a very potent vasoconstrictor, as well as angiotensin II, which is a very potent vasoconstrictor. So under conditions where we need to retain fluid, we don't want to be peeing out the fluid into the urine, but actually retaining it and increasing blood pressure. By increasing blood volume, then we use these two hormones, and the kidney is instrumental in controlling the expression of these two hormones. The kidney also is involved when we have an overload of fluid, and that is when we have very high levels of volume within the system, then the stretch on the atria of the heart causes the contractual cells of the heart to secrete a hormone, which is called anti atrial natriuretic factor that's shown here, ANF. And it works on the kidney to increase the output of urine from the body, so that we then counteract the overload of volume within the body. So what happens then under conditions where we are exercising? So under conditions where we are exercising, we have to have a dynamic change in our blood pressures. And the first thing that you notice is that as you're exercising, let's say you're swimming or you're running, then your cardiac output has to increase and that's what's shown here. So cardiac output is going to increase, and as cardiac output increases, the amounts of blood that's being distributed to the skeletal muscles in, in aerobic exercise will increase, and that's what's shown here. Because we are getting more blood to the skeletal muscles then we are phaso-dilating in that region due to active hyperemia, then the total peripheral resistance is actually decreasing. And that's again, because we have very large capillary beds, and so we have a very large basal dilation that's occurring. So, the peripheral resistance actually is decreasing under this condition. So, what happens to our mean arterial pressure? Cardiac output is increasing, but total peripheral resistance has decreased, and under these conditions, mean arterial pressure increases, but not by very much, and that's what's shown here. So this is true for aerobic exercise, such as running, swimming but when we start looking at exercise which is anaerobic exercise, so that you're lifting weights and when you're lifting weights under these conditions, the contraction of the muscle is such that it will stop perfusion to the muscle. It will collapse the actual vessels which are bringing the blood into this area during the time when you have contraction, and then when you release the weight, then you have re-perfusion, and you will have reactive hyperemia. So you have higher re-perfusion to the region, because it is now perfusing away the metabolites that had built up during the time of ischemia. Under these conditions, mean arterial pressure goes up, cardiac output is going up, as well as the resistance in the system, and so all three are going up. So under these conditions of anaerobic exercise where you're lifting weights, then you will have an increase in all three. What happens to our baroreceptors? In the condition where we were running, the baroreceptors actually recognized, before you even start running, that you want to go run, And they reset to a higher set point. So that the baroreceptors are not fighting, the ability for you to increase your sympathetic drive to the system and to increase cardiac output. So the baroreceptors then, are sort of a way of adjusting the actual level of cardiac output that the body is running. Alright in our last case, is what happens in hemorrhage? In hemorrhage we could have a we have a very large loss of blood. Let's say you were swimming in the ocean and your arm gets bitten by a shark, and so now you're losing blood into the ocean. So that's a pretty dramatic situation, and you're going to have a drop in blood pressure, and this drop in blood pressure, of course, is going to be sensed by the baroreceptors, and they're going to start to decrease they're firing, and sympathetic drive will go up. But that's pretty dramatic thing, but does this thing happen during regular times during your day? And yes it does. So, to think about it when you're lying in bed, your body is prone, and the blood is distributed across the body in an equal manner. As you then hear the doorbell ring and you jump out of bed, then immediately as you jump out of bed, all of the blood is going to rush from your head down towards your feet, because of the gravitational pull has changed on the body. And as the blood is rushing momentarily to the feet, you have sort of a little bit of time where you feel a little woozy, a little dizzy, and then you feel fine again and you're all right. So what happened? The baroreceptors actually, were underneath this reaction. So as you went from a prone position to an upright position, and all of the blood is moving towards your feet, then the baroreceptors sense a drop in pressure. And again, they sense the change in pressure, and they will decrease their firing as sympathetic drive increases. So sympathetic drive increases, that causes venous return to increase. We're having higher total peripheral resistance bringing blood back to the heart and to correct the situation and up to the brain. In addition to having just these momentary changes from the pressures that the baroreceptors are actually, through the sympathetic drive or parasympathetic drive, can control, we also can have times where we will trigger off the addition of hormones, or hormonal control. And that would be that if we have a drop in pressure. Say for instance, you go in to the red cross, and you donate one liter of blood. You go in to the red cross, give one liter of blood, you've just given up 20% of your blood volume, and under this condition then your body's going to sense a drop in volume or a drop in pressure. Baroreceptors will of course decrease their firing, sympathetic drive will become activated, but we will also have a sensing of the drop in blood by the kidney. And the kidney will release a hormone, which is called renin. Renin will lead to increased circulation of aldosterone, another hormone, and two vasoconstrictors, anti-diuretic hormone and angiotensin II. And these two very potent vasoconstrictors, are going to add to the sympathetic drive, which is going to increase the total peripheral resistance and help with the venous return or the filling of the heart. So under certain conditions, and we don't have to evoke the activity of the kidney. But under conditions where we have a more critical state, such as where we have hemorrhaging and we're swimming in the ocean and losing an arm, and we're bleeding into the ocean, or under the state where we donate a whole liter of blood to the Red Cross, under those conditions then, you will actually have the kidney maybe become involved. What is the first thing that they do for you when you've just given one liter of blood? They actually will give you something to drink, usually orange juice, and so you get fluid that you're bringing in from the outside of the body to increase the blood volume in the body. So the last thing I want to talk about is a condition where we have hypertension. And in hypertension, hypertension is usually, is defined as having a systolic blood pressure above 139 millimeters of mercury. So if systolic blood pressure is either greater than or equal to 139 millimeters of mercury. So this is hypertension. What will happen is that in chronic hypertension the baroreceptors will adjust, and they will reset their set point, and allow the individual to be working at higher pressures. The hypertension can be because we have an overload of fluid, for instance, we're eating a high salt diet, and we're retaining a lot of fluid in the body, to maintain osmolarity. Or the hypertension can occur because we had a very high sympathetic drive, so we have a very high resistance within the vasculature, and that gives us a very high after load, so the heart has to work against this high after load and that increases the pressures within the system. Over time, the hypertension can lead to a weaker heart, and so the heart is going to initially start to increase the size of the walls of the heart, you are going to have thickening of the walls of the heart to be able to contract against this higher pressures, and eventually the hyperpati of the heart actually leads to a lower or weaker contractility. So this is what's shown here. So under conditions where we're having a weak contractility, so we then are going to call this heart failure. And if we look at the stroke volume verses the end-diastolic volume of such a condition, we can understand how the body's going to try to address the problem. We have 2 cardiac function curves, the one is the normal cardiac function curve, and this one, that's the blue curve, and the orange curve is for the failing heart. We start with the normal resting value, where our heart has an end-diastolic volume of about 150 milliliters. And under this condition, the stroke volume that the particular heart can put out is about 70. The weak heart is not able to put out 70 milliliters as a stroke volume, but instead the weak heart, at 150 end diastolic volume is sitting here and the weak heart is only putting out about 35 milliliters for the stroke volume. The kidney perceives that we have a lower cardiac output and lower pressures within the system, and so the kidney then retains fluid. And as the kidney retains fluid, the heart moves along the curve to an end-systolic volume, so we're having better fill, we're having more venous return up to 200 milliliters for the end-systolic volume. And under these conditions, if we look across, now we have a stroke volume which is about 16. So by retaining the fluid within the system, then the stroke volume is actually improved. So the body then, is using the renal system to supplement or to support the cardiovascular system, and it does so by retaining fluid. You retain fluid, you have a better venous return, better filling of the heart, stretching of the ventricles and that it improves our stroke volume. Now what's the downside of this? The downside of this is that we're now working at much higher pressures, and by working at much higher pressures the heart is now going to have the possibility of edema. So in higher pressures across the capillary beds, fluid is going to be leaving the capillary bed and moving out into the interstitial tissue, but the pressures across the capillaries are too high, and that fluid then stays out into the tissue, and we have edema. You could have edema which is occurring in the feet or in the ankles of the body or you could have edema that may be occurring within the lung. And if it occurs within the lung between the air spaces and the blood vessels of the lung. In that particular space which is very narrow, if there's water in that space, then the diffusion path for the gases is affected, and the individual has trouble breathing, and so we're going to be short of breath. So there's a downside then to having the body retaining too much fluid in order to counterbalance for a weak cardiac output. So what of our general concepts? So the general concept number one is that the cardiac output is matched with the tissue blood flow by maintaining mean arterial blood pressure essentially constant. The second is that the baroreceptors are going to act as short term regulators of arterial blood pressure by providing sensory information to the cardiovascular center in the medulla, which is in our brain stem, and the autonomic alpha from the medulla is going to be maintaining the blood pressure constant. Third, we have a total blood volume, which can affect cardiac output, by changing the end-diastolic volume of the ventricles. So that is, if we had a higher venous return, we increase end-diastolic volume, we can get a bigger stroke volume. And fourth, we have hemorrhage, which can lead to reduced cardiac output, hypotension, as a result of reduced ventricular and diastolic volume. And the normal compensatory response to hemorrhage is vasoconstriction of the arteries and the veins, and increased cardiac contractility, and heart rate, and that's of course through sympathetic drive. The fifth general concept is that hypotension can also result from a sudden postural change or from prolonged quiet standing. You've seen these individuals who are the guards for the British Queen, and all of a sudden they topple over. And that's because they are standing stiff for very long periods of time, and eventually there is insufficient perfusion to the brain. So this is called orthostatic hypotension. And the compensatory response is as stated above, and that's simply that we are going to increase sympathetic drive. Six, aerobic exercise will increase cardiac output, and it can go up to as high as 30 liters per minute. But it will reduce the total peripheral resistance, so their mean arterial pressure remains almost constant. However in weight lifting, cardiac output, total peripheral resistance and the mean arterial pressure are going to increase. Seven, the failure of the heart to maintain a normal cardiac output leads to an increase in total peripheral resistance, which will increase the capillary filtration in the tissues and reduce re-absorption, and we will end up with edema. And eight, the compensation for the decreased cardiac output caused by heart failure includes increases in the heart rate, total peripheral resistance, vasoconstriction of the veins, and retention of water by the kidneys. And all of this is to try to increase stroke volume and to thereby increasing cardiac output. All right, so this concludes then our dealing with the cardiovascular system, and the next time we're going to start talking about the respiratory system. So, we'll see you then.
