# 5-2 Respiratory System: Lung Volumes and Compliance  
Hello. We're going to talk about the, have our second session on the respiratory system where we're going to talk about lung volumes and then lung compliance, which is the dispensability or the stretchability of the lung. So one volume that we've already talked about it the title volume which we see here in this graph which we said it's going to be about 500 milliliters and it's going to be the volume that you bring in or push out of the lung, or that comes out of the lung just during normal breathing or at rest. However, if you, after you take a breath out, a normal breath out, you realize that you can exhale even more air. And so, that amount extra that you can exhale is called the Expiratory Reserve Volume. It's the volume that you have in reserve that you can ex-, exhale out of the lung. However, there will still be air left in the lung that you can't get out, no matter how hard you try. That's going to be the residual volume of the lung. That's going to be hard to measure using normal equipment but it is, you can measure it. That residual volume is essential because if you get out all the air in the lung, so that parts of the lung are touching one another, then the surface area, the surface tension of water is going to be so strong that you won't be able to Open up the lung again and so that residule volume is going to be important. After you take a normal breath and you inhale, you can inhale even more and that until your lung is completely full. And so that is going to be the inspiratory reserve volume. So, you can add these volumes together to come up with capacities. And so, if you add up the inspiratory reserve volume, the title volume, and the Expiratory reserve volume, then you come up with the vital capacity. Basically if you completely full up, fill up your lung and then completely exhale as much air as you can, what is that volume? That's the vital capacity. If you add the vital capacity and the residual volume, that gives you the total lung capacity. When you fill up your lung completely, how much air is in there? And then the other important capacity is called FRC or functional residual capacity, which is going to be the expiratory reserve volume plus the residual volume. So basically when you just exhale after a normal breath, how much air is sitting in your lungs. The whole reason why this is important is because with disease, these volumes and capacities can change. And so we're going to be talking about that some. One measure that's important and useful to look at is the amount or the volume that's the residual volume compared to the total lung capacity. So basically, what percentage of the air that you can have in your lung is risidual volume. In, in obstructive lung disease, which we're going to talk about in just a minute, then resi-, the air is hard to get out of the lung for that person. And so, that means that then the residual volume is going to increase. So that the residual volume versus total lung capacity ratio is going to increase. In a restrictive lung disease, which is when it's hard to get air into the lung, it's kind of the opposite problem. Then total lung capacity is going to decrease, and so, in, in that way this ratio of residual volume versus total lung capacity can also increase in disease. This slide is really just restating using words and using text what I just talked about in a previous slide, defining these different volumes and capacities. So let's spend a minute talking about these lung diseases because we're going to be using them throughout the rest of these lectures to show different properties of the lung. So we talked about an obstructive lung disease, which is when it's hard to get air out of the lung. And so, often you're going to have to use more force to get it out. And we already talked about if it's hard to get the air out of the lung, then that often is going to mean that the residual volume inside the lung Is going to increase. So you might say to yourself, okay, well I can understand why it might be hard to get the air out of the lung, but then shouldn't those same processes also make it hard to get air into the lung. And the difference is that When you're inhaling, since the lung is expanding, then you're really pulling those airways open, which is going to lower their resistance. Compared to when you're exhaling and everything's relaxing. And in a diseased lung some of that collapsing and that emptying of the lung is then going to make any problems worse, in terms of resistance. So some examples of some obstructive lung diseases are going to be things like asthma, where you have constricted airways because of smooth muscle constriction and due to Increased inflammation. So you've increased the resistance in the airways and, like I said, that's going to impact exhalation more than it's going to impact inhalation. Another set of diseases we're going to talk about that Is, occurs commonly in smokers, is going to be COPD, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. There's two kinds that we're going to talk about. Chronic bronchitis, which is going to be when there's going to be a lot of mucus around, which again is going to. Close-off the airways, or make them smaller. And increase resistance, particularly during exhalation. Or emphysema, which is going to be a destruction of the lung tissue, which means that it doesn't recoil as much. And so it doesn't help with exhale, exhalation as much, which is also going to affect the air leaving the lung and we'll talk more about that. Then the other flavor or type of diseases are going to be restrictive diseases, where for some reason the lung can't expand as easily or as much, and so. That's going to affect the total lung capacity. It's going to be reduced. And again we're going to talk about two different types of diseases. One, a disease that like fibrosis of the lung, where you have increased amount of connective tissue which prevents the lung from expanding normally. Which it then means the total lung capacity is going to be decreased. There also could be diseases such as scoliosis, a curvature of the spine that literally effects the anatomy of the body such that the chest well can not expand as it normally would, which again is going to reduce total lung capacity. So, let's talk about one property of the lung and how that changes in these two types of disease. So, the lung is going to be, have a certain amount of compliance, which is distensability or stretchability. And the formula for that is going to be how much delta V over delta P. So if you have a certain change in pressure, how much is the volume of the lung going to change? So this curve in green is showing for a normal person. How, if you have a certain change in pressure, then the lung is going to change in volume. You'll notice once the lung gets full up here at high volumes, that a change in pressure doesn't really change the volume. So that means that compliance changes as the volumes of the lung change. And as the lung volumes get larger, compliance goes down. It doesn't stretch as much because it's already full, that makes sense. The other thing that compliance is going to have a relationship with is recoil. So that a lung with high compliance is going to have low recoil. Meaning, it's not going to come back to its original state very easily. And so we're going to see that in this blue curve. Which is increase of, of compliance. Which is going to happen in a d-, an obstructive disease. For instance, like in emphysema, where we said the elastic tissues that are, they do, they are going to make, compliance more difficult, so, elastic tissues that are in your lung do make the lung less compliant. However they're really important in the recoil that allows you to empty your lung. And so in emphysema if you don't have those elastic fibers it is easy to fill the lung. So it's very compliant, so just a little bit of change in pressure causes a large increase in volume. However the problem is, you've lost the elastic fibers that are so important in the recoil of the lung. You've got high compliance, low recoil and that's what's important in getting the air out. And so one example of this, just to give you an idea, a picture would be if we said that this plastic, this paper bag is like, someone who's lung has, who has Emphysema, where it's going to be very easy for me to blow it up, but then once I blow it up it's not going to really empty. So its got high compliance but low recoil. So it's easy for me to fill it up, but now I've let go and it's just, Just, it's remaining full. So it's got high compliance, low recoil. So we can also, now, talk about the opposite issue, which is going to be decreased compliance. As in someone with fibrosis. As in someone with a restrictive, certain restrictive lung diseases. Where we said we've got connective tissue so that we, the lung isn't as dispensible or stretchable as it was. So you can see in this curve, you, even with large changes in pressure, the lung still does not open very much or increase in volume very much. So we've got decreased compliance but that means then we're going to have high recoil. So it's going to be easy for the lung to get rid of the air. And so an example of this would be, for instance, this balloon where I'm going to have to use a lot more force to put the air in it compared to the paper bag. But, as soon as I let go, the air's going to come rushing out. So it's going to have low compliance but yet high recoil. That took a lot more force[SOUND] but now, it's emptied very easily. And so, you can think of these are, as two extreme examples of having decrease compliance versus increased compliance and what that's going to mean for exhalation versus inhalation. Let's just talk about a couple of factors that are important in determining lung compliance. And one is elastic tissue that we already
 talked about, where if you destroy that elastic tissue, that means the lung does become more compliant. It's easier to open up and to fill, but then the problem is now, you don't have that recoil that's needed to exhale. Versus fibrosis where you've decreased compliance because you're you've got, for instance, connective tissue that won't allow those elastic fibers, it won't allow the lung to open up. So, that means that inhaling is going to be difficult, but exhaling, you're going to have lots of recoil for exhaling. Another important factor in lung compliance is going to be surfactant. Remember that's the substance that Type II cells sitting in the alveoli make that are going to be detergent like molecules so they have a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic portion. So that they reduce the surface tension of water. Premature babies who are lacking surfactant have extreme difficulties breathing and so they're often have to be put on ventilators because it literally requires too much work. To open up the lungs and, overcome the surface tension of water, without surfactant. So they can be put on a ventilator, and also given surfactant, which, which helps, with deal with that problem. So, both of these issues, both of these factors are going to be important in lung compliance. Letting the lung open up. One issue with surface tension is that if it's the same, as we're saying in this portion. If it's, if the surface tension is the same in two different alveoli that have two different radiuses, two different sizes, then that means the pressure will be different. It's the Law of Laplace, where the pressure is going to equal the surface tension divided by the radius. So if the radius is different and the surface tension is the same, then pressure will be different. And it will mean that small alveoli with a small radius will have high pressure, which means that air from small alveoli will enter into larger alveoli, which is not going to be helpful. And so the beauty of having surfactant is that it preferentially changes the surface tension more in smaller alveoli, which then allows for there to be equal pressure in alveoli of different sizes. So that's another important aspect of surfactant, and it's effects on lung surface tension. So, we've talked about the different volumes and capacities that are in our lungs and how they can be measured and calculated. And then we've talked about compliance, which we're going to come back to, which is going to be how dispense, dispensible is the lung that's going to be a low compliance, high recoil in restrictive lung diseases. And in obstructive lung diseases where it's hard to exhale, then you're going to have high compliance but low recoil.
