Hypothalamus-Pituitary - Thyroid Axis
====================

H-P Axis - Thyroid
---------------------

Greetings. 
So today we're going to talk about the hypothalamus-pituitary axis and how it regulates the basal metabolic rate of the body. 
And it does so by regulating the thyroid gland. 
The thyroid gland, uh, secretes two hormones, which are called thyroxine and triiodothyronine. 
And these two hormones work on every cell of the body. 
These hormones are not only necessary for regulating basal metabolic rate of all the cells of the body. 
But they also are necessary for the expression of other endocrine, other endocrine hormone receptors within specific tissues. 
So that they will affect reproduction. 
They'll affect growth and so forth, through their permissive acts. 
The thyroid hormones, also, are absolutely required for the development of the central nervous system. 
A baby that is, that is developing with, with inadequate amounts of thyroid hormone at birth, then will have profound mental retardation. 
And that child cannot be, it cannot be corrected by then giving proper amounts of thyroid hormone post birth. 
So that child then has profound mental retardation throughout life. 
So let's look at the thyroid gland. 

Structure of Gland
---------------------

The thyroid gland sits as a, like a bow tie across the front of your, of your throat. 
It has two lobes which are connected by an isthmus, and that's what's shown here. 
The thyroid gland is an unusual structure in that it has what are called follicles within the gland itself. 
These are essentially balls of cells. 
And there's a single layer of cells where they are going to be secreting the hormone into the capillary beds which are surrounding all of the balls. 
And so if I took a section through the gland, it would look like this. 
Where the cells which are secreting the hormones are here. 
And then surrounding that, we have a cap – a network of capillaries. 
There are no ducts because again, this is an endocrine gland. 
In the interior of the ball, we have what's known as a colloid. 
And the colloid is the extra-cellular storage form of the preprohormones. 
This is called the thyroglobulin, it's a 330 uh, molecular weight species. 
So this is an inactive species and it's the storage form for the hormones. 
At any given time, you have about three months worth of storage thyroglobulin within the follicles. 
Outside of the follicles we have cells which are called C cells. 
And these are for clear cells.
And these cells to create a second hormone, is called calcitonin. 
The calcitonin is used for classification of bone.
It's not very important in the human, but it is very important in other species. 
One other point about this gland, and that is it's that it's dynamic. 
So they're under stimulation, the thyroid gland can grow in size, and that's what's shown here. 
It can grow the size by having the cells actually getting very tall and making a lot of the colloid. 
They're making a lot of the, the hormone, and this would be under a, a stimulation. 
So this would be a very active gland. 
It can be so large that, the growth of the gland can so large that it's actually palatable, where you can see it, as a growth across the neck. 
The other time, when we can see a growth of the gland, is when we have a very inactive gland. 
And under these conditions then, where there's a lot of colloid which is being stored within the gland but we're not releasing the hormone. 
And this would be a hyposecretion condition. 
In both of these cases this growth of the gland would be very large, so we have an enlargement of the, of the gland. 
And that is called a goiter. 
And we'll talk about goiters a little bit later in this lecture. 

Thryoid Hormones
---------------------

The thyroid gland makes two hormones that are active, both are active species. 
The um, the hormone themselves are at, ether conjugates of thyroxine residues. 
So that's what's shown here. 
And, we iodinate, the ring structures of these thyroxines. 
And we have four iodines on a, the two rings. 
Then we have T4, which is thyroxine. 
In the condition where we remove one of the iodine residues from the outer ring. 
Then we have what is called triiodothyronine. 
Triiodothyronine and thyroxine are both active species. 
The thyroxine, T4, is pro hormone for, for T3. 
And in relative activity, the T3 is more active than the T4. 
We can also release from this gland, a, an inactive species. 
And the inactive species is shown here, where one of the inner rings, that is the iodine on the inner ring is missing. 
So if the iodine is missing on the inner ring, this would be called a reverse T3, and this is an inactive species. 
If both iodine's are missing on the inner ring, it would be a reverse T2, again an inactive species. 
If you recall from our, our lecture on the endocrine concepts, the thyroid hormones are inactive in plasma. 
So as they're secreted from the gland they are bound to carrier proteins. 
The carrier proteins are made by the liver, and these, the carrier protein then delivers the hormones to the target tissues. 
At the target tissue the carrier protein has low affinity. 
The target tissue has high affinity and the, uh receptors. 
And so the hormone is pulled off from the carrier which has low affinity to bind to the high-affinity receptors. 
The high-affinity receptors are present within the nucleus of the target cells. 
These, the thyroid hormones are going to be binding to, transcription factors, and activating transcription of of the target cells. 

Follicular Cell Activity
---------------------

So let's just look at these follicular cells, for a little bit longer. 
The follicular cells, as I told you, are secreting this pre, the preprohormone, or the colloid, into the center of the follicle. 
And so that would be present here. 
And the cells themselves are what's diagrammed here. 
So we have an apical surface of the cell which is facing the colloid, or our storage form of the hormone. 
And on the basal surface we, are the cells are facing the blood. 
So this will be the capillaries, which are perfusing these cells. 
On the basal surfaces of these cells, we have a sodium-iodine co-transporter. 
So the iodine is being delivered from the diet, in through the blood, is being picked up in in and moved into the cells by this importer. 
And we're, we are using the sodium gradient, which is established by the sodium potassium ATPase to, to move the iodine into the cells. 
The iodine can move into the cells such that we can have 25 to 1 ratio of iodine within the cells versus what's within the plasma. 
So these cells then actively are, are going to be storing iodine or taking up iodine from the blood. 
As the iodide enters the cells, is, it is converted to iodine and then this peroxidase which is an enzyme. 
Anything that has an ase, A-S-E at the end of it, is an enzyme. 
This peroxidase binds, or attaches the iodine to the thyroglobulin which has been secreted and stored into this colloid. 
So this, the colloid itself will be iodinated. 
Under conditions where we are synthesizing this hormone, this, this colloid that is the preprohormone. 
We are also going to be releasing hormone from the cells. 
And that's by taking the colloid up into the cells fusing it with a, with the lysosomes, fusing these membranes with the lysosomes.
And then releasing the cell, the hormones on the basal surface towards the blood, both T4 and T3 are released. 
More T4 is released than T3, and the ratio is about 11 to 1 from the cells. 
As the T4 and T3 are released, they bind to the uh, the carrier protein which is present within the plasma. 
And then they are delivered to their target within the body. 
The thing that you should notice about these cells, is that they are regulated. 
And they are regulated by TSH or the thyroid stimulating hormone. 
And the thyroid stimulating hormone is being secreted by the pituitary. 
So, this is going to be regulated then by the hypothalamus-pituitary axis. 
And the receptor for TSH, is present on the basal surface, facing the blood stream. 
So TSH, as a peptide hormone, it's going to be binding to these membrane boundary receptors. 
And under the conditions where TSH is binding to the receptors, we are going to synthesize the colloid. 
And we're also going to be synthesizing and releasing from these cells, the T4 and the T3. 
Because the thyroid hormone is bound to carrier, there, there is a large amount of hormone which is present within the plasma, but it's in an inactive state. 
Remember that only the free hormone is actually able to bind, enter into the cells and bind to their, their receptors within the cells. 
So we have a very large amount then of stored hormone that's circulating within the plasma. 
Up to as much as seven days' worth of hormone that can be circulating within the plasma. 
And because we have a lot of stored hormone that's circulating within the plasma, we often use TSH levels to tell us what the activity of the gland is. 
And so THS oh, TSH, which is within the blood, is used to monitor the activity of the gland. 

H-P - Thyroid Axis
---------------------

What does the axis actually look like? 
So, this is what's diagrammed here. 
So, the hypothalamus is releasing TRH, which is thyroid releasing hormone. 
It works on the thyrotrophs of the anterior pituitary to secrete thyroid stimulating hormone. 
The thyroid stimulating works on the thyroid gland to release T3 and T4. 
And they in turn, feedback in a negative feedback manner, both to the anterior pituitary as well as to the hypothalamus. 
So again, a complex negative feedback loop, and this would be the long negative feedback loop. 
Just as we, as we described for it, other hormones which are secreted by this axis, the TSH, will also mediate a short access negative feedback loop. 
That's shown here, and we can have an ultrashort which is mediated by TRH. 
So this is a complex negative feedback loop which is regulated at multiple levels by these circulating hormones. 
The entire axis is also regulated by thermal signals which are coming from the body. 
So when the body temperatures is perceived as cold, the axis is, is activated. 
And that, we will then, under those conditions, increase the amount of TRH. 
Which is being secreted from the hypothalamus which will increase TSH levels, which will increase TS, T4 and T3, and will drive, then, the metabolic rate, of the, of the tissues of the body. 
In addition to the thermal signals which are coming into this axis, we have caloric signals. 
And the caloric signals, is a hormone which is coming from fat. 
So the fat stores secret this hormone called leptin. 
Leptin will activate the axis when we have high amounts of leptin. 
The body is perceived to have fuel storage. 
We are then able to drive the metabolic rates of all of the cells of the body. 
So high leptin will cause an increase in the TRH and in turn it will increase TSH levels and it will in turn increase T4 and T3 levels. 
Leptin at the same time regulates feeding behavior. 
And so Leptin, when we have high Leptin levels the body perceives high storage forms of fat. 
And so it will then turn off the feeding axis. 
So, under those condition we drive metabolic rate but we are turning off feeding. 
The converse, of course, is true when we have low leptin levels. 
We will turn off the thyroid hormone axis, and we will turn down that axis turn down metabolic rate, try to conserve our fuel, and that we will drive feeding. 

Tissue Conversion by Deiodinases
---------------------

Thyroid hormones are also regulated within the periphery by the peripheral tissues. 
And this is done by what is known as conversion. 
The thyroid hormones, as I said, the T4, is the prohormone for T3. 
So the T4 can be converted to T3, by removal of one of the iodines. 
And this removal is done by the deiodinase. 
Again an enzyme has an ase, A-S-E at the end of the, of the term. 
So deiodinases are present within the peripheral tissue and the deiodinases are able to convert T4 to T3. 
There are multiple forms of deiodinases. 
The one that we're going to be interested in is deiodnases I, which is present on the surface of the cells. 
And as T4 enters into the cell, it can be converted to T3, by the deiodinase. 
And this enzyme also makes reverse T3, so about 50% of the T4 would be made into reverse T3, which is inactive. 
And 50% into T3 which is the active species. 
The active species moves into the nucleus and activates transcription. 
And particularly, the two, two genes that are turned on are the beta 1 adrenergic receptors and the sodium-potassium ATPase. 
And then, particularly when we're turning on beta 1 adrenergic receptors in the heart, I mean, if you recall, that drives heart rate. 
Okay, we'll come back to that point in a little bit. 
The deiodinase I is a regulated enzyme, so its expression is regulated in these different tissues and it's regulated by energy level. 
So under starvation deiodinase I is down regulated. 
So we lose the deiodinase I activity, with starving, or starvation or, or restriction of fuel. 
The second deiodinase that's present within the body is distributed in very specific locations and that is the CNS, the heart, thyroid gland, and the skeletal muscle. 
This deiodinases, is deiodinase II, it is not regulated by starvation so this deiodinase is always active in those cells. 
Deiodinase II is present on the nuclear envelope. 
So it's located internally to the cell, to the target cells, sits on the nuclear envelope, and it's going to convert T4 to T3. 
So cells which have deiodinase II, then have very have very high occupancy of the transcription factor, such as in the brain. 

Changes in Thyroid Hormones During Fasting
---------------------

So what happens then when we have changes in our, in our state our feeding state. 
So then that's what's shown here. 
So when we have a mild fast, let's say you are traveling. 
And you only have enough money for one meal a day. 
And so that means that you're restricting your caloric intake. 
You need, normally you need about 2,000 calories a day to maintain your normal metabolic rates. 
The, under these conditions, let's say you're taking in 1,500 calories a day, and so under these conditions the free T3. 
That's this very, very small amount of free T3, that's going to be present within the plasma, can decrease to up to 50%. 
But if we looked at the free T4 in these individuals we would see that it's normal and that means that the TSH, and the TSH levels that, the thyroid stimulating hormones levels are also normal. 
Now why are they normal? 
The negative feedback loop from T4 is still active and it's meditating negative feedback to the pituitary and to the hypothalamus. 
So the axis is, looks as a normal axis, but we are running at a lower metabolic rate within the body. 
The reason that we're running for a lower metabolic rate is that the deiodinase I is, has been down regulated. 
So the expression of that hormone, or that enzyme, within the kidney, the liver, and so forth, is now lower. 
Now if we extend our fast and we go into a severe fast where we restrict our caloric intake. 
Let's say, to 1000 calories a day, and for, for several, several days, or several, for a week. 
Under these conditions, we can decrease the free T3 so that it's less than 1%. 
Or 1%. 
And we will also decrease the free T4. 
So we are decreasing the total amounts of the thyroid hormones which are available to the body, and we will decrease the TSH. 
Now why it is that the negative feedback loop didn't automatically kick in and cause the THS, TSH levels to rise? 
And the reason it did not, is because under conditions of severe dieting, we used up our leptin depots. 
And by using up the leptin depots, the fat depots, the, the signaling of leptin has dropped and by, by having leptin decrease, the TRH signaling then has also decreased. 
TSH has decreased. 
And the entire axis is now decreased. 
What's the advantage to the body? 
The advantage to the body is that under these conditions, where we have restricted fuel coming into the body. 
You want to be able to maintain the CNS activity, and to be maintaining the contraction of the heart. 
And so the fuel that is actually present in the body for use is being, being used by those specific tissues rather than by being used by other tissues, within the body. 
So we go to a lower metabolic rate. 
The consequence is, is that these individuals who feel very cold. 
They are not able to generate as much heat within the body. 
Their metabolic rates have been decreased. 
In addition to that, they would feel very tired, and they would not have a lot of, sometimes they get a little foggy. 
They don't think very clearly, it's a level running on low fuel. 

Pathology
---------------------

So what is our pathology of the system? 
So one of the pathologies that we've talked about is that we can develop a goiter, and the goiter can develop under different circumstances. 
The first is that the goiter which is this very little, enlargement or the growth of the gland itself, can occur when we don't have enough iodine, in order to be, and so we cannot make the hormones themselves. 
So in, in conditions where you have iodine deficiency in the diet, goiters will form, will make a lot of colloid, and that's because the, the HP axis is being driven we have high levels, circulating levels of TSH. 
'Cuz we do not have our negative feedback loop which suppresses the, the axis. 
The goiters used to be very prevalent within, within the population at large across the world and then they added iodine to salt. 
And when they added iodine to salt, iodinized salt, goiters, the presence of goiters or the prevalence of goiters has decreased dramatically. 
The other condition where we can have too little hormone or hyposecretion of the hormone, as we already mentioned, can occur during development. 
And when that occurs, then we have what's called congenital hypothyroidism. 
And under these conditions, the CNS fails to develop, so we have a problem with DNS development. 
And we'll get mental retardation. 
It will also affect growth, but that once the baby is born, and you correct the thyroid hormone levels, then growth then, then can make up for its retardation through development in utero, but the CNS is not able to develop. 
There is a condition which is in, an immune disease which leads to hypothyroidism and this is called Hashimoto's disease. 
And Hashimoto's disease they, the gland is actually being degraded or, or lost. 
So Hashimoto's disease, an autoimmune disease, the cells, the follicular cells are, are entering into apoptosis. 
And so we are losing the cells which are able to make the hormone. 
A goiter can form under these conditions, even though we're losing the cells. 
And this is because a colloid would be made by the cells that are present. 
And so the, they're trying to make up for the loss of the, of the hormone. 
But, but, the total effect is that there is going to be too little thyroid hormone being, being made. 
The conditions of hyperthyroidism, again, will give you a feeling of cold, being very cold. 
Your skin turnover is, is effected so that we get flaky skin. 
Your hair gets very brittle. 
They have low energy levels. 
The, the individual just doesn't feel like they're thinking very well. 
They feel like they're a little foggy, in the way that they're, they're able to address problems. 
And these individuals can be helped by giving them then T4 or T, T3. 
Usually T4 is what's given, this is, but in some instances both T4 and T3 are given. 
In the condition where we have too much thyroid hormone, then this called hypersecretion. 
In hypersecretion, the gland again can grow because we're having a strong stimulation. 
Either because we have tumor that's growing within the gland, or we have a strong stimulation by TSH, of the gland itself. 
One of the most common of these hyper-secretion conditions is called Graves' disease. 
Again, this is an autoimmune disease, and here the antibody, IGG, actually recognizes, or binds to the TSH receptor. 
It mimics the binding to that receptor and activates the receptor. 
So under these conditions we will stimulate the TSH receptor. 
We will increase the, the secretion of T4 and T3, but we will decrease the TSH levels. 
And TSH levels fall because the negative feedback loop is working. 
So we have very high levels of circulating thyroid hormone. 
But we don't have proper proper negative feedback regulation of that, of that gland. 
This is a very common disease, and it turns out to be one of the most common of all of the endocrine diseases for the human. 
There's one other condition which, where we have hypersecretion from the gland and this is called thyroid storm. 
And in the thyroid storm, we don't have a condition which is a medical emergency. 
The thyroid storm, the individual has a very, very fast heart rate. 
This type of tachycardia is extremely fast. 
So it has difficulty in filling the heart. 
Because the heart is beating so rapidly. 
They have a high fever. 
They're generating a lot of heat because they're driving their metabolism. 
And the one thing that the thyroid, that the thyroid hormone is doing is that it's actually up regulating what's called an uncoupling protein. 
And this uncoupling protein is, is causing the mitochondria to not only, the mitochondria to generate heat rather than to generate ATP. 
These individuals, the problem is really with the cardiovascular system. 
If you cannot fill the heart, then the cardiovascular will collapse. 
And so they enter into the ER, they have a high fever, very fast heart rates, tachycardia. 
You give them a beta blocker to, to protect the heart, and then you give them a blocker for the deiodinase I, which is up regulated in hyperthyroid conditions. 
You block the, that particular enzyme, causing that enzyme to decrease in content throughout the body. 
And then the body will then drop the amount of T4 and T3 that's being made, that's driving the body, the, the metabolic rate within the body. 

Key Concepts
---------------------

So, what are our key concepts? 
The key concept number 1 is that T3 and T4 are synthesized and secreted by the thyroid gland in response to TSH which is coming from the pituitary. 
Secondly, that the thyroid hormones are formed from the hydrolysis of iodinated thyroglobulin. 
And the thyroglobulin is our preprohormone. 
And that normally, we have about three months supply of the preprohormone within the thyroid gland. 
Third, we need dietary iodine in order to be able to synthesize the hormones. 
So we have to iodinate the thryoxine residues of these, in order to have an active species. 
And four, under normal conditions, the majority of T3 is made from T4. 
T4 is our prohormone, and this is usually made in the peripheral tissues by an enzyme which is called the deiodinase. 
And this is an important site for regulating the basal metabolic rate of the tissues. 
And five, the thyroid hormones are essential for development in the nervous system, in particularly the nervous system, for normal body gross, and to regulate basal energy integer within the body. 
So the next time we come in here, then we're going to talk about how the hypothalamus-pituitary axis can regulate our metabolism in, in stressful situations. 
And this is where we regulate the adrenal glands. 
So, see you then.
