# 5-1 Respiratory System: Anatomy and Mechanics  

Hello everyone. Today we're going to start with the respiratory system. So we have eight little videos about the respiratory system, and this first one is going to be about the anatomy and some of the mechanics of breathing. Before we get started with that though we're just going to talk about some of the functions of the respiratory system. So an obvious one is that the respiratory systems going to be important for bringing in oxygen for oxidative metabolism and then for removing the resulting carbon dioxide. But another really important function of the respiratory system is to maintain homeostasis in the body in terms of pH, and we'll be talking that, about that in some future sessions. An issue that we have with the respiratory system because we're literally bringing in thousands of liters a day of air into the respiratory system and, which has the surface area of a tennis court. That means there has to be a big effort in terms of host defense to protect the body from all of that air coming in. And so we're not going to talk about that too much but, But keep in mind that that's another important function of the respiratory system. Like the cardiovascular system, we're going to be talking about flow in terms of it's relationship to a pressure gradient and resistance. So the larger the pressure gradient, the greater the flow. The greater the resistance, the lower the flow. And of course, like in the cardiovascular system again, the resistance is going to be tightly correlated to the radius of the tube into the fourth power. So small changes in the radius of an airway is going to make a large difference in terms of resistance. Just a little bit of gross anatomy of the respiratory system where we've got the pharynx which is basically most of the throat. That is then going to lead into the trachea. You have a single trachea that is then going to branch into 2 bronchii. A right and a left, and then the bronchi are going to continue to branch to form bronchioles, which will then lead to the parts of the lungs that are going to actually exchange air. So, that's what's shown in this diagram where we see we've got the single trachea that's going to branch to form bronchi and then branch more to form smaller branches of bronchioles. And this portion, this pink portion is going to constitute the conducting system, the conducting portion of the respiratory system. That is going to be taking the air into the respiratory portion, the portion that's going to exchange oxygen and CO2 with the blood. But, in addition, it's also going to moisten and clean and warm the air before it gets to that respiratory portion of the lung. Also the control of some of the flow into the system is going to be at the level of the bronchioles, which you can remember because it's similar in its name to the arterioles. Those again are going to have the smooth muscle that are going to do a lot of the controlling of flow and resistance in the system. And then we also are going to have a role for the conducting system in defense against microbes. Through some cells producing mucus. And then other cells having cilia that can beat that mucus that has collected debris and particles out of the respiratory system up to the throat and mouth. The conducting system is going to be about 150 milliliters in volume of air that it contains and we're going to be concerned with that later because it's not. Going to exchange air with the blood, and so that's, we're going to consider it to be what we call dead space because of that. The respiratory portion, which is the portion that it's going to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood capillaries, is going to be about 3 liters. And that's going to consist of alveolar ducts and alveolar sacs, all of which are made up of little alveoli which are these little scalloped edges that you see here. Here's another view of alveoli. Each of these little compartments is an alveolus. And the lung side of the, an alveolus is going to have two different cell types. One type one cell that's going to be a very flat, thin cell. That's going to cover most of the surface of the alveoli and since it's flat and thin, it's going to allow for fairly easy diffusion across it compared to a normal sort of cuboidal type cell that we see in other spots in the body. Then there is also a type 2 cell, which is not going to be as flat, but is not also going to be taking up very much surface area, and that's going to be making a substance called surfactant that we'll be talking about later, as well as being stem cells. So we have these two cell types that are making up the alveolus. Then beyond them in the connective tissue will be capillaries. They're lined by endothelial cells. So for oxygen and carbon dioxide to diffuse in and out or between the air and the lung, and the capillary, they're only going to have to cross a distance that's very thin. Just across a very thin type one cell, through a little bit of connected tissue, and through the endothelial cell to get in to the circulation. Even though this is a very thin surface, it's going to have a large surface area, about 75 square meters, again about the size of a tennis court, so that there's a large area for diffusion to occur. So, let's start talking about how breathing occurs. We're going to create what we call negative pressure breathing. Most of your breathing, at rest, is going to be occurring through the contraction of the diaphragm. Which is going to be a dome-shaped muscle sitting underneath the lungs and underneath the rib cage. And so when it contracts and the cells get shorter, it's going to become instead of being dome-shaped, more flat. And as it becomes more flat it's going to lift up the ribs. Almost like a round handle on a pail would be lifted by your hand. So it's going to lift up those ribs, which is then going to open up the chest wall, and since the lungs are attached to the chest wall, they're going to open up as well. Then when you're going to exhale when you're just at rest, what you will do is relax mostly the diaphragm and any of the other muscles that you use to breathe in, which is going to then cause the chest wall, because of the recoil of the lung to go back to its resting state. So you're at rest, going to use primarily diaphragm to inhale, and then you're going to relax your muscles to exhale. If you're going to be doing something like exercise, where you're going to want to take a deeper breath, then you'll start to use lots of other muscles in between the ribs, other chest muscles, and that will allow you to take a deeper breath. If you want to also breath quickly, which you would also want to do in exercise, then you're also going to Use muscles to help you exhale more quickly. And so again you'll use chest wall muscles, and also particularly abdominal muscles to help get that air out more quickly. And we'll talk about that more later. So, we're going to talk, fill in some more details later. But re, remember, when the chest wall opens or expands, the lung is going to do the same thing. And so, that means that If you have a constant amount of air in the lung at first, when it first expands, but yet, the volume gets larger, then that means the pressure is going to, to go down in the alveoli. So that's what this is showing right here. The P, the pressure in the alveolus when you inhale becomes less than the atmospheric pressure when you inhale and open up the lungs. That means then now we're going to have a pressure gradient and air is going to flow into the lung. When you expire then you're going to relax. The chest wall is going to. Collapse or get smaller, the lung is going to do the same thing and so if you have a smaller volume with the same amount of air in it, then that means pressure is going to increase and that means that the pressure in the alveolus or in the lung is going to be greater than atmospheric pressure. And so air will flow out until they become equalized during expiration. So, that's going to be that process of negative pressure breathing when you create negative pressure to inhale and then that's what allows air to flow in. So we're going to talk about ventilation, which is going to be this process of bringing air in and out of the lung. So a ventilation cycle is going to be 1 breath in and then 1 breath out. Of course, you're going to have a certain frequency of ventilation, how often you breath per minute, which is going to be in the range of 10 to 18 breaths. Then you have what we call title volume, which is going to be the amount of air that you take in or, or push out during a regular breath at rest. So very often that's going to be around a half a liter. So if you combine the tidal volume with the frequency of ventilation then you can calculate a minute ventilation. How much air are you bringing into your respiratory system per minute. Which is often going to be something on the order of 5 liters per minute. In it. But we've already talked about how the depth and the rate of breathing can change, particularly in ins-, instances of exercise where you're going to both breathe more deeply, and more frequently, and so you're going to be using additional muscles instead of just relying primarily on the diaphragm. So, the key concepts from this section was just that. We're going to have this, the respiratory system that's going to be important for exchanging gases with the blood. We've got the dead space, which is going to be the conducting zone, the trachea, the bronchi, the bronchioles, that cannot exchange gas with the blood and so in terms of respiration, that's why we consider it to be dead space in comparison to the alveolar space where is where respiration occurs. We talked about breathing and how you're going to inhale and exhale and how you're going to have skeletal muscles that are going to contract, particularly the diaphragm to expand the chest cavity, which is then going to cause air pressure in the alveoli to drop and air to flow in and then, muscles are going to relax. The lungs going to go back to its original volume which is going to increase the pressure in the lung, and air is going to flow out.
