# 8-3 Gonad Axis: Female Cycle  
Hello, we're going to start now with the third session in the reproductive system, but our first session on the female reproductive system. And in this session, we're going to talk about the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad axis, and how similar it is to what we just talked about in the male. And we're going to talk about the maturation of the follicle, which is a structure that contains what's going to become the egg, contains the maturing [unknown]. 

So let's look at this diagram, which is very similar to the male diagram, but just has some female specific parts to it, where again we're going to have GnRH being released in a pulsatile manner. And that it is going to act on the anterior pituitary to cause release of both FSH (follicle stimulating hormone) and LH (luteinizing hormone). The gonad in the female is going to be the ovary, so those are going to act on the ovary. FSH is going to act on granulosa cells, so instead of the Sertoli cells of the male, it's going to act on the granulosa cells. And just like the Sertoli cells that were in direct contact with the forming sperm, the granulosa cells are going to be surrounding the developing [LSA ?] in females and responding to FSH, and also producing inhibin which will then reduce FSH secretion. Then, we have LH (luteinizing hormone) release and it's going to act on the theca cells, instead of the Leydig cells that we had in the male. The theca cells are, again, like the Leydig cell, is going to be outside of where the granulosa cells and the oocyte are. Just like the Leydig cells in the male, they're going to be producing androgens like testosterone. Like the Sertoli cells, then the granulosa cells will be converting the testosterone being made by the theca cells to estrogen. That estrogen is going to then be important for the formation of the mature egg, but also be released throughout the body to influence the characteristics of the person to make them female. And to feed back in a negative manner on GnRH, FSH and LH production. So, lots of similarities in this axis to the male, which can help you remember both axes. 

The thing that we've added now with the female, that we didn't have in the male, is the uterus. And I think a really important thing to keep in mind is that with the ovary, the hypothalamus and pituitary, we've got really the same setup as we had in the male. So this whole left side of this figure is what you're used to with the male. The important part to remember, so you don't get confused, is that the uterus is not being controlled directly by the hypothalamus and the pituitary. The uterus is being regulated by the ovary because it's being regulated by estrogen and progesterone produced by the ovary. So to keep that hierarchy in mind. I think helps simplify what we're going to be talking about. Remember, we talked about how the male can produce new sperm continuously throughout their life once they're sexually mature. And in females, this is not the case, where the germ cells are going to be generated in embryogenesis, and there's going to be lots of them made, 10 to 20 million per ovary. However, they are going to start quickly dying, even in infants in the female as well as throughout a woman's reproductive life. They will continue to die, and we'll talk about that some. So that actually only 400 to 500 are going to mature the ovulation since a woman is going to be releasing only one mature egg a month usually for her reproductive years, which could be something like from age 13 to age 50, something like that. And so this going to be [first of all confined time ?], a woman when she has hit menopause because she's basically run out of eggs, unlike a male who can continue to produce sperm and she's only releasing one egg a month usually. So, males have to produce a lot of sperm because the process of fertilization using sperm is not super efficient. Women produce a lot of germ cells (oocytes), but the process of forming mature eggs is not very efficient. And so that's where the numbers are lost is during that process, and we're going to talk about that now. 

So we've got the oocyte which is going to become the egg once it is released and mature, and it's a very large cell so that's what's shown here. This teal inside of the red circle I'm drawing is the cytoplasm of the maturing oocyte with then its nucleus. This circle in the center. So it's a very large cell, and it's going to be surrounded by other cells. These are going to be the granulosa cells. The cells they're going to be similar to the Sertoli cells where they're in direct contact with the oocyte surrounding it, and they're the cells that are responsive to FSH. Then there are also going to be other cells surrounding them, the theca cells, which are shown in this darker brown out here. So those are going to surround and make this into like a little package, and that package is the follicle. So the follicle's going to be the theca cells, the granulosa cells, and the oocyte. Remember, the theca cells are going to be what are responsive to LH, and what make androgens that then the granulosa cells, sitting right next to the oocyte, convert to estrogen, and then at the end we got this large mature follicle. Now, one thing to keep in mind is this second part of maturation is what's going to occur at the beginning of a woman's cycle, but that many these follicles are going to initiate maturation. But yet, only one is going to be released. And so what happens during the first part of a woman's cycle, and we're going to talk about this more, is that many follicles start to mature, but only one is going to kind of win the race. And the one that's going to win the race has a couple of attributes. So we talked about how we're going to have FSH and LH. We're going to be producing androgens, which are going to get converted to estrogen, and so the follicle that is able to produce a lot of estrogen first will have a couple qualities. One is the estrogen that follicle is producing is going to act in a positive feedback manner to then increase the number of LH and FSH receptors on the follicle. So, this is going to be one of our only times in this course when we're going to talk about positive feedback, where estrogen is going to cause an increase in the receptors, which are then going to allow them to be more sensitive to the hormones that cause the production of estrogen. And so it's going to be this increase, an increase in the amount of estrogen that's being produced, plus, as you can see, the follicle itself is getting bigger. There are more and more cells, so more and more estrogen's going to be produced. So, when you've got this chosen follicle, it's large, it's producing a lot of estrogen, and it's very sensitive to LH and FSH. All that estrogen being produced by that follicle eventually becomes enough that it acts on the pituitary to reduce FSH levels. That's fine for that follicle because we just talked about how it's mature. And so it's very sensitive still to FSH because it's got an increased number of receptors. All the other follicles that aren't as mature are going to die due to the decreased amount of FSH. So that's how we have one chosen follicle, the first one to be producing a lot of estrogen and have a lot of receptors so it remains sensitive, is going to be the one that can survive and to continue to mature. 

So let's show now what's going to happen at ovulation where by now we've just got one follicle. It's continuing to mature and we're starting down here. We're saying okay it's a large follicle, and it's producing large amounts of estrogen. This is what's tricky about the female because we've talked about the fact that estrogen is usually going to have a negative feedback regulation of the hypothalamus and pituitary. When it's the follicle producing this huge amount of estrogen at this time, that causes a positive feedback influence, and causes increased GNRH production and causes the interior pituitary to, to release large amounts of LH (luteinizing hormone). And this produces what called the LH surge, so that's the important thing to remember that this increase in estrogen only. Only estrogen, not progesterone, coming from this chosen follicle is now going to have a different influence on the HP axis to now increase LH production. And that increase in LH is going to cause ovulation, release of the oocyte. Because remember the oocyte was just a small part of it, we also had all those granulosa cells and all those theca cells, that follicle is going to collapse and get converted to a corpus luteum. So that's why this is called luteinizing hormone, because it's causing the follicle to form a corpus luteum, which is going to be a progesterone an estrogen producing machine. And we'll see then how that influences the uterus in the next section, but at first, we have a lot of estrogen from the follicle. Then we have ovulation, and then we have a lot of progesterone and estrogen being produced. So again how does this system work where we've got sometimes low levels of estrogen have a negative feedback relationship with LH production, but then at other times when you have a large amount of estrogen being produced, then we get a lot of LH being produced. This can be explained again with our kisspeptin system so this time when we look at the figure we'll look at the female side. Where remember we said that a male brain is going to result from testosterone being produced during gestation (during the formation of the fetus). And the male brain develops so that we have one group of kisspeptin neurons that synapse with the hypothalmic neurons. In females, a female brain is also going to have that same group of kisspeptin neurons. That's going to be our negative feedback neurons, but then it has an additional group of kisspeptin neurons that instead, synapse with the cell body of the hypothalamic neurons. And these are the neurons that are sensitive to that large amount of estrogen, which then cause an increase in GnRH release, which then allows for that increase in LH production, which causes the ovulation. So this is how you can explain the fact that sometimes estrogen causes a decrease in LH production, and sometimes it causes an increase. 

Okay, so this is just another way of looking at the phases of the ovary and kind of to look at the whole 28 day cycle where we call the first day of the cycle when menstruation begins because it's easily identified. At that time, that's when follicles are going to continue to develop multiple follicles. Because we have FSH and LH being produced about a week into the cycle, one follicle is going to be producing enough estrogen that it's going to become dominant. And the other follicles are then going to be basically killed by it indirectly, because it's going to lower FSH levels. That dominant follicle is going to continue to mature, so it's going to be producing more and more estrogen, which is then going to cause the LH surge causing ovulation. And then we said, so that's going to be the follicular phase, that's the formation of the follicle. It starts being a follicle after ovulation because now the egg is gone (the oocyte is gone), and then it turns into a corpus luteum. So that's why the second half of the cycle is called the luteal phase because we've got the corpus luteum going. And it's going to be making estrogen and progesterone for a certain amount of time, and then if it doesn't get a signal if there's pregnancy, it's going to degenerate, and that what's going to trigger menstruation and the next cycle, and we'll talk more about that in the next session. 

So, we've talked about how we've got the similarity between the ovary and the testes between the female HP gonad axis, and the male axis. How we're going to have FSH and LH governing the germ cell maturation and steroid production that's so similar between the two. And then we talked about how when the chosen follicle matures, it's going to produce estrogen. That's going to increase its own sensitivity to LH and FSH, and it's going to reduce the amount of FSH released by the pituitary and the reduction in FSH is going to lead to the death of less mature follicles, and that we're going to have this LH surge due to high levels of estrogen, and the reason why this can happen is because we've got that second group of kisspeptin neurons.
