# 8-1 Hypothalamus-Pituitary Gonad Axis  

Hello everyone we're starting four sessions on the reproductive system. We're going to have two videos on the male reproductive system and two on the female reproductive system. And, in this first session we're going to start off talking about the hypothalamus pituitary Gonad axis as some of this is going to tie in to what Doctor Jakoi talked to you about just the normal endocrine system. 

Quickly, before we do that, we're going to talk about sexual differentiation, the process of becoming either male or female. One thing to keep in mind is that the primordial germ cells that will become either sperm or an egg in the female, are going to be generated during embryogenesis. Of course, which type will that will be formed is going to be determined by the genetic sex of the individual, where females have two X chromosomes, and males have one X chromosome and one Y chromosome. The presence or development of testes in males is going to rely on the SRY gene on the Y chromosome. So if you have a Y chromosome and there is a mutation is SRY, instead of a testes, an ovary will form. So the default pathway is sort of the female pathway, and this SRY gene is necessary to have a testes. The presence of a testes versus an ovary is going to determine gonadal sex, however there can be problems that mean that just because you have a certain type of gonad, that doesn't mean that's going to lead to the proper phenotypic sex, which is what the appearance of the individual is. And we're going to talk about that in just a second. 

So, once you have your genetic sex, which is which chromosomes you have, those are going to determine whether you have a testes or an ovary. And, since the testes and the ovary are going to be the source of the hormones that are going to determine whether you become or appear to be a male or a female, then obviously, whether you have a testes or an ovary is be going to be important in that. And, what's also going to be important though, is for you to be able to respond to that hormone properly or to be able to make that hormone properly. So just because you have testes and an ovary, that doesn't necessarily mean that you're going to be able to appear as a male or female in that your pheonotypic sex might not match up with your gonadal sex. And one example of this is that the testosterone receptor on the X chromosome is going to be required for someone to have a phenotypic sex of male because even if they have testes and they're making testosterone. If they don't express the testosterone receptor, then they won't be able to look like a male. And so, there are many steps that need to occur properly in order all of this to align and to form a male or a female. 

Okay, so we're going to switch gears and now talk about the hypothalamus-pituitary gonad axis, where we're going to start off at the hypothalamus where gonadotropin releasing hormone is going to be made. And the amazing thing about this axis is how similar it is between males and females. Most of this is going to apply to both, where the GnRH is going to be released by the hypothalamus in a pulsatile manner. As Dr. Jakoi talked to you about for the other releasing hormones from the hypothalamus, those are going to act on the anterior pituitary and cause it to release two different hormones, FSH, follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone. Those are named for their functions in the female, but they're going to have very similar functions in the male as well. So the anterior pituitary is going to release these two hormones, and they're each going to bind to two different cells in the gonad. So the gonad in the male, which is the germ cell producing organ, is going to be the testes. In the female, it's going to be the ovary. And FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) is going to act on Sertoli cells in the testes, and those cells are responsible for helping to form the actual sperm. So FSH is going to act on the Sertoli cells to stimulate spermatogenesis. LH (luteinizing hormone) is going to act on a different cell type, the Leydig cells, and stimulate them to produce testosterone. That testosterone is also going to be needed by the Sertoli cells to allow for sperm development. So, you need both FSH and LH For sperm development. The testosterone is also not just going to act locally in the testes. It is going to have an important role in sperm production, locally. But then, the testosterone is also going to get released and course throughout the body to help to make the person male. And we'll talk more about that. Testosterone is also going to feed back onto the anterior pituitary and the hypothalamus in a negative feedback manner to reduce GnRH production and to reduce LH production. The Sertoli cells are also going to make an molecule called inhibin, which will reduce FSH production. But we're not going to talk about that too much. 

So just to summarize we're talking about how in males and females, GnRH release is going to be pulsatile, and that we're going to need FSH and LH in order to make our gametes. In both cases, we're going to need secretion of testosterone for the development of the egg and of sperm, and that we're going to have inhibin, which is going to decrease FSH and our sex hormones, and this is again going to be true in both sexes. Are going to regulate the hypothalamus and the pituitary as well, in a negative feedback manner. Now, this one confusing part of the story is that I just talked to you about and even on this diagram, it shows how testosterone, and this is true for estrogen and progesterone as well, has a negative feedback role. Influence on hypothalamus that it decrease GnRH release, but yet it was known that those neurons that release GnRH in the hypothalamus do not express receptors for testosterone or estrogen or progesterone. And so there was something missing, and what was missing is a separate group of neurons that do express receptors for the sex steroids. And those are neurons that make the neurotransmitter kisspeptin. So we call them kisspeptin neurons and we're going to just focus on the left hand side of this figure because it's the male side since these hypothalamic neurons that make GnRH don't express the testosterone receptor. Instead, these kisspeptin neurons that synapse. That the ends of the axons of the hypothalamus do contain testosterone receptors, as in the testosterone can reduce kisspeptin release, which binds to this molecule GRP54 on the hypothalamic neurons (that's this ligand)  is the receptor for kisspeptin, and then reduce release of GnRH by the hypothalamus. So in this way, we've got these kisspeptin neurons that are responding to stimuli and helping to control release of GnRH by the hypothalamus neurons. 

The other important role of kisspeptin neurons is going to be in the process of puberty. So when we're children, we have very low levels of testosterone in males and estrogen in females circulating in our bodies. Even though they're very low levels when we're children, this whole axis (the hypothalamus and the pituitary) are extremely sensitive to those low levels. And so those low levels, greatly reduce and maintain a low level of GnRH production. And so again, this is happening through the kisspeptin neurons that they're being very sensitive to testosterone in males and maintaining low GnRH production. However, as a person is approaching puberty, then this system gets less and less snesitive to the testosterone or the estrogen present, which means that then a little bit more GnRH is produced, which then produces a little bit more testosterone, then the system gets a little bit less sensitive. And so then, even though there's a little bit more testosterone, still more GnRH is produced until eventually there's more and more testosterone produced, and there's less and less sensitivity of the GnRH neurons so that we get to the adult amount of sensitivity and the adult levels of testosterone, and so again these kisspeptin neurons are going to be miportant in that. So we're going to have this pulsatile release of GnRH but its still going to have the cyclic property. In males its going to be changing on a daily basis. GnRH will be released every one to three hours, in a 24 hour cycle, and in females, it'll be a 28 day cycle, and we'll talk about that in the next sessions. So, in this session, we've talked about how we're going to have germ cells being made in the gonads, as well as the sex hormones that we're going to have this pulsatile release of GnRH, which is going to cause release of FSH and LH from the pituitary. This is for both males and females. And that FSH is going to be important for germ cell production; LH for steroid hormone production. And this is both in males and females. And that then we're going to have negative feedback from those steroid hormones that are being produced onto those kisspeptin neurons. And that also, remember, that obviously, the sex steroid hormones are going to be important in determining the secondary sexual characteristics of a person, making them appear to be male or female.
