




# 10-2 Urinary System: Filtration Rate and Regulation
Greetings. So this is our second lecture on the urinary system, and today what we want to talk about is the filtration rate and the regulation of the filtration rate. So the learning objectives, then, are to explain renal clearance and it's relation to the glomerular filtration rate. Secondly, we want to explain the pressures that determine the glomerular filtration rate. Thirdly, autoregulation of the renal blood flow and the glomerular filtration rate, which is GFR. And then fourth, we want to talk about this concept of autoregulation, and this means the that we're going to talk about the myogenic response, and the tubule glomerular filtration, the feedback, not filtration but the feedback, which regulates the glomerular filtration. And then lastly, we're going to define the filtration load. 

Okay, so what's this first concept then, about renal clearance, and what are we talking about when we're talking about glomerular filtration rate? So if you recall, we have a renal tubule, which is diagrammed here. And in the Bowman's capsule is this region which surrounds the glomerulus, that's our first capillary bed. This is our little nephron, and it is being fed by an afferent arteriole. The afferent arteriole breaks up into the first capillary bed (the glomerulus), and that's drained by the efferent arteriole into the second capillary bed. This Bowman's capsule, or the end blind end of the renal tubule, surrounds the first capillary bed, and then it forms a tubule, then extends from that and will connect to the collecting duct. So, in this first region then, we are going to have filtration. And the filtration simply means we are going to move solutes and water across this first region. And then that makes the filtrate that's going to be within the renal tubule and then as the filtrate moves through the renal tubule. We can reabsorb material that is moving back into the capillary bed that surrounds these renal tubules, or we can secrete materials, and that is move it from the blood space from the second capillary bed back into the renal tubule. 

Now renal clearance is a concept which allows us to measure the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). That is, how much filtration is occurring at what rate? At what rate is something being filtered within this very first region of the tubule. And to do that, we want to have a substance that is neither reabsorbed nor secreted. We want something that is only being filtered so that what is being filtered is equal to its excretion rate. That means we would only have to take a blood sample and a timed urinary sample and we'd be able to calculate then the filtration rate of this material through the system and that would be called clearance. So, under those conditions, clearance is equal to GFR. The substance that can be used for this for this measurement is called inulin. And this is not insulin, which is the hormone, but inulin. And inulin is a very large polysaccharide. This molecule is filtered freely by the filtration site of the nephrons, but it is not reabsorbed and it is not secreted. So the clearance rate of inulin, then is equal to GFR. If you have a substance which has a renal clearance rate which is less than inulin, and that's what's shown here, then that substance has to have a net reabsorption. So that material is being removed from the filtrate as it's moving through the renal tubule. And conversely, if we have a substance which is being excreted at a rate that's greater than inulin, then we have to have a net secretion of that material. 

And so, renal clearance then is going to give us these measurement of how well the kidney is working. That is, we can measure GFR, and the normal GFR is going to be 180 liters per day. This is normal GFR. By calculating clearance for a given substance, and comparing it to that of inulin we were then able to determine whether or not that material would be reabsorbed by the tubules and whether or not that material is being secreted by the tubules. 

So how do we regulate the generation of this filtrate to begin with? And this is going to be dependent on the types of pressures which are coming into the filtration area. So we have, just as we have in any area of the body where you have a capillary that is fed by an arteriole and is usually drained by a vein. And within that capillary, we have two pressures, one which is the osmotic pressure, and that's due to the amount of protein that's within the blood. And the second is that we have the hydrostatic pressure, and that's how much pressure is actually entering into this region, and that pressure decreases as it goes across the capillary due to the resistance of the capillary. So this is what we normally see anywhere else in the body. When we have filtration, it's because the hydrostatic pressure is greater than the oncotic pressure, and fluid then can leave the capillary and enter the interstitial space. And reabsorption is when we have the hydrostatic pressure is less than our oncotic pressure. And the material (the fluid) is then reabsorbed or moved back into the blood due to the osmotic attraction of the proteins which are within the plasma. So the filtration pressure then is going to be equal to the hydrostatic pressure that's entering into the glomerulus that's entering into our capillary. And it's going to be opposed by the oncotic pressure which is present within the plasma. And that's what you've seen everywhere else in the body. 

But what's unique to the kidney is that we have a third pressure which is opposing filtration. And that pressure is these hydrostatic pressure which is within Bowman's capsule. In most areas of the body, when the fluid is moving into the interstitial space, there is no fluid pressure within the interstitial space. Here however, we have that tubule which is filled with fluid (the filtrate) and so it has a hydrostatic pressure. And it's opposing the movement of materials across this region. 

So how do we control the pressures that are within this glomerulus? Because we have an efferent and an afferent arteriole, we are able to control the the resistance of these vessels, so that the amount of hydrostatic pressure which is within the glomerulus can be varied by the differences in the in the lumenal size of both the afferent and efferent arterioles. This is unusual. Normally, we have only one spigot, the afferent arteriole, but here we have two. So we have both the afferent arteriole and the efferent arteriole. And that's what's diagrammed here. 
So we have in this instance where if we constrict the afferent arteriole, then the amount of hydrostatic pressure within the glomerulus falls, and that means the GFR will fall. Conversely, if we dilate the afferent arteriole, then we have higher pressures in the downstream capillary which is our glomerulus, and we will increase GFR. That is like what we're used to seeing in all the other areas of the body. 

But now, what about the efferent arteriole? If I dilate the efferent arteriole, I actually will decrease pressure upstream, and that will cause the glomerulur filtration rate to fall faster. But if I constrict the efferent arteriole, then the pressure upstream increases. The pressure within that glomerulus will increase, and I can increase GFR. The kidney is able to regulate the diameters, that is the luminal size of both the afferent and the efferent arteriole. And it can do so independent of the mean arterial pressure. And we'll talk about that in a few minutes. Secondly, these, the afferent and efferent arterioles are sensitive to the sympathetic drive, so as we know elsewhere in the body, an increase in sympathetic activity will cause vasoconstriction and these two regions will vasoconstrict. But we have greater vasoconstriction of the afferent arteriole. Hormones, which are vasoconstricters, such as ADH or vasopressin, also can act on these arterioles and cause the smooth muscle cells to contract, but ADH tends to make the efferent arteriole contract further than the afferent arteriole. So although we have vasoconstriction, we have efferent arteriole constricting even further, and that actually increases the GFR, and offsets the initial decrease that we have from the constriction of the afferent. 

So the pressures across the glomerulus can be regulated, and they can be regulated by the resistance which are present within both the afferent and the efferent arterioles. The kidney can actually work independent of the mean arterial pressure. And this is simply that the renal flow to the kidney is determined by the renal artery pressure and by the resistance within these arterioles. So flow is going to be equal to delta p over r and the delta p is set by the pressure which is within the artery minus the pressure that's within the vein, the renal vein, divided by the resistance of the arterioles. The kidney is able to change the resistance within the organ in such a manner that it's independent of the mean arteriole pressures, and this simply means that it can maintain the filtration rates within these little nephrons independent of variations within the mean arterial pressure outside of the kidney. 

So why is this important? So let's think about it. If you were sitting in your chair, it's fine. If you're sitting there and the kidney is filtering the blood, it's not a problem. But if all of a sudden, you decide that you want to be more active and you start to walk rapidly, then the kidney is able to modulate the amount of pressure that's coming within those little nephrons so that it maintains the amount of filtration pressure at a constant level, even though the mean arterial pressure within the body may have increased to give you more cardiac output in order to block fast. The kidney is able to do this between 80 millimeters of mercury and 180 millimeters of mercury in the mean arterial pressure. So it's working independent of mean arterial pressure between 80 millimeters of mercury and 180 millimeters of mercury. 

And it does this by changing the resistance that's across both the renal artery, but more importantly, the resistance within the the arterioles. The resistance within the arterioles is regulated by two means and this is called autoregulation. And this is simply, the first is called the myogenic response, and that we all know is that if we stretch the walls of an arteriole that it opens the stretch-activated calcium channels, calcium enters, and we get a contraction. These are the single units smooth muscle cells. In this particular case then, if we increase pressure, then the myogenic response is such that it will cause a contraction of those smooth muscle cells, and increase resistance within the area as the flow is kept constant. That's simply a simple stretch reflex. If we decrease the pressure within that area, then those cells will relax so that we can have a higher flow within the region to keep the pressure then constant, the flow constant within the area. 

But there's a second way that these little nephrons will adjust the amount of filtration pressures that are occurring across the first capillary bed. And the second one is called the tubulo-glomerular feedback. The tubulo-glomerular feedback is that there is a sensor that's inserted within the tubule itself. And this occurs within the thick ascending loop of henle as it comes back to the originating glomerulus. And that's what's diagrammed here. So again, here's our glomerulus. And now surrounding it, we have Bowman's capsule and the renal tubule. The renal tubule extends down into the medulla and returns through the thick ascending loop of henle. It returns to that originating glomerulus. And in fact, it's returning to the afferent arteriole of that glomerulus. There's a little sensor called the macula densa, and this sensor then can sense the filtrate flow within the tubule itself as well as sodium. If the flow decreases within the tubule, then the macula densa can signal to cells which are called the juxtaglomerular cells (JG cells). 

The juxtaglomerular cells are the afferent arteriole smooth muscle cells, so they are the smooth muscle cells which are present on our afferent arteriole. The afferent arteriole, those smooth muscle cells, are receiving a signal that has them dilate or relax, so as they relax, the vessel vasodilates. When the vessel vasodilates, more filtrate then will be filtered (produced). So we have an increase in GFR. So an increase in GFR, increases the filter flow through the tubule, and now the macula densa gets the type of filtrate at a pressure that it wanted. 

There is a second signal which is released from this system. And that is when the filtrate flow is low and the JG cells, or juxtaglomerular cells, these smooth muscle cells of the afferent arteriole, vasodilate or relax. To vasodilate these vessels then what happens is that they also will release the molecule called renin. Renin acts as a hormone. It's acting by delivery through the blood, but it's also an enzyme, and it's going to start a cascade where we are going to increase the expression of two major vasodilators, and this is going to be called the RAAS system. 

And we'll talk about this in more detail in the next lecture. But the RAAS system is renin, angiotensin-2 which you all know is a major vasoconstrictor, and ADH which is anti-diuretic hormone, or vasopressin. And that these, these two vasoconstrictors, then, are going to increase total peripheral resistance within the system because they'll cause vasoconstriction throughout the entire body. This is a systemic response. By increasing resistance throughout the entire body, we then are going to increase our pressures throughout the body. 

And that gets us back to cardiac output, is equal to delta p over r, which is mean arterial pressure over total peripheral resistance. If I increase total peripheral resistance, then I can increase the pressures within the system. So that the sensors then, these little macula densas that are within the nephrons, not only are going to locally control the amount of filtrate that's going to be produced by that given nephron, and that's by allowing the JG cells to relax and we vasodilate when we need more flow or a higher GFR, but it also affects blood pressure throughout the entire organism. That is, this is going to change then the peripheral resistance within the organism. 

Alright, so let's look at the few these terms and concepts. So the first one is glomerular filtration rate, and we say that the glomerular filtration rate is how much filtrate is actually being produced at that first capillary which is the glomerulus. And that under normal conditions we have 180 liters per day or 125 milliliters per minute. The second concept, which we haven't talked about, but let's talk about now. And that is that we want to know how much of a specific substance is being filtered. This is we want to know the amount of the substrate filtered per time. So we can calculate this by taking the concentration of that material, let's call it Y, that's in the plasma times the glomerular filtration rate. And that will then tell us how much of that material can be removed from the plasma in a given time period. So, for example, the filtered load of glucose. If glucose is 10 milligrams per milliliter, then times 125 milliliters per minute for our GFR, then the amount of glucose then that can be filtered is 1250 milligrams per minute. So that would be the filtered load of glucose that's entering into the filtrate by the kidney. In the third concept, then is the renal blood flow. And the renal blood flow as we said is set by the difference between the renal artery pressure and the pressure that's with in the renal vein. And the resistance then within the organ is set by the resistance within in the arterioles. So this is simply again flow is equal to delta P over r. And that's an equation that you've seen several times. 

So what are our key concepts? So the first one is renal clearance, and this is the removal of the substance from the blood. If the substrate is freely filtered and not re-absorbed and not secreted, then its clearance is equal to GFR or glomerular filtration rate, and such a substance is called inulin. Secondly, GFR is going to be determined by the pressure differences within the glomerulus and Bowman's capsule. So the amount of hydrostatic pressure, which is pushing fluid out across the filtration barrier is opposed by the hydrostatic pressure that's within Bowman's capsule, and it's opposed by the oncotic pressure that's within the blood itself. That is the amount of proteins that are attracting water back into the blood. Third, the glomerular filtration rate is regulated independent of mean arterial pressure when between 80 and 180 millimeters of mercury. And this is done by changing the resistance of those renal arteries and that is both the afferent and the efferent arterioles, and they can be regulated independently. Fourth, autoregulation includes the myogenic response, that is dilation or constriction of our afferent and efferent arterioles, and secondly, by the tubulo-glomerular feedback, and this is where the macula densa sends the sends a signal to the juxtaglomerular cells, that is the smooth muscles of the afferent arteriole and causes either dilation or constriction of those cells. So it changes the pressure then downstream in the glomerulus. And it obviously changes glomerular filtration rate. And five, glomerular filtration rate can be regulated by neural and by hormonal inputs because the alpha adrenergic receptors are present on the smooth muscle cells of the afferent and efferent arterioles and so the sympathetic drive then can cause vasoconstriction in this region. And we also have the actions of vasoconstrictors such as ADH or vasopressin and of the angiotensin II, and these can also cause vasocontraction or the contraction of the smooth muscle in those arterioles, and that will change the glomerular filtration rate, or the pressures across that region and change glomerular filtration rate. Okay, so the next time when we meet, we're going to talk about reabsorption and secretion, which is the other the other functions of the renal tubule. So, see you then.
