Return to [[Microecon:Main|the list of lectures]].
<br><br>
**The lecture notes are a collaborative effort of the participants in the course. You are not required to contribute to the lecture notes, but are encouraged to do so. Together, we can create resources that will be helpful to everyone.**

## Notes for Week 1: Trade

Trade is the social manifestation of economics since it illustrates that you don't really value what you have until someone else wants to have it from you. - Fritz Saint-Paul Antibes/France

Trade is the exchange of goods and services between individuals, businesses, countries etc. It is necessary because Individuals, businesses, countries etc produce certain goods or services, and can use these to get goods that they need and don't make themselves. The example with the students highlights the fact the resources that are initially randomly allocated may not be adequate/appropriate to meet the needs of the students. By arranging a trade with other students, they obtain an item that is better suited to them. 

Trade is the exchange of goods or services between persons or entities. The traded items are typically exchanged based on their perceived value by the buyers. 

Trade stems from the fact that there are limited resources available for a larger demand and there is an unequal distribution of different kinds of resources between people. This could either be due to surplus of a certain product being owned by a particular person (Let's call him person X) or the person being more specialized at manufacturing or generating that product (A) compared to others who are in need of it. In a similar way, the other person (person Y) may have a product (B) which is perceived as just as valuable as product (A), that he or she would want to trade with person X for product (A).

Fundamental to trade is the notion of specialization, or spending your limited resources doing what you are best at.  Specialization allows you to maximize your ability to create value and thereby, maximizes your purchasing power. - Jerry S. Orlando

The example given in the lecture revolved around the professor giving students items randomly.  He then asked the students to assign a value to the gift they were given, 1-10 (1 being the least valuable and 10 being the most valuable).  After assessing values and tallying them, he then asked the members to exchange their items and asked the value after the exchange.  In general, the values increased for the traded items.

I was curious about a second round of trade. And the idea of money: I can trade what I got for something symbolic in order to get something else is not available here or at the moment - Jeanfreddy Gutiérrez

<h1>Trade ensures that limited resources get distributed in a more efficient and equitable manner to people or entities that desire or use them.  In essence,<i> trade creates value.</i></h1>

"Trade Creates Value", It´s so simple that it worries me to not emphasize it enough when planning business ventures and public policies. - Salvador Gallegos Almaguer.

Every time a trade occurs, it is because the individual believes that what they are receiving is more valuable than what they are giving away.  The notion that "trade benefits everyone" therefore acknowledges/argues that value may be subjective and trade between two parties is always willing and with full knowledge.

BALANCE OF TRADE--
Trade must have a balance in value. Each party involved in the trade must feel that the exchange of goods and/or services between both parties is of equal value in proportion. Hence a major concern for any country doing business in the International Market Place is keenly concerned with this financial principle. --Herbert Vaughn

For a trade to happen, there must be items, either tangible or intangible, of value that can be traded. The items must possess some sort of value to those that would engage in the said trade. People would normally trade what they have for something they do not have in other to gain some benefit or create value.

Trade creates value!! Seems like this is the lifeblood of how societies interact. - Diego A.

Through the exchange you can replace goods which have none or very small value to you, with person who wants them very bad, and you'll receive product which have big value to you or just bigger than a first one. Only you can create value for this things. -- Mateusz, Poland 
[[Category:Microecon|Trade]]
