Return to [[Microecon:Main|the list of lectures]].
<br><br>
**The lecture notes are a collaborative effort of the participants in the course. You are not required to contribute to the lecture notes, but are encouraged to do so. Together, we can create resources that will be helpful to everyone.**

##Notes for Week 2: 1.1. What is a Market?

An actual or nominal place where forces of demand and supply operate, and where buyers and sellers interact (directly or through intermediaries) to trade goods, services, or contracts or instruments, for money or barter. - businessdictionary.com

 Fruit and vegetables cost more at a farmer's market than at an ordinary shop because the demand for locally grown produce is greater, and there is a smaller supply of it.

A market is the process by which the prices of goods and services are established. It is one of the many varieties of systems, institutions, procedures, social relations and infrastructures whereby parties engage in exchange. While parties may exchange goods and services by barter, most markets rely on sellers offering their goods or services (including labor) in exchange for money from buyers. - Shilpi Gupta.

Products at a farmer's market cost more than at an ordinary shop because the local farmer can not benefit from the scale of economies. This means that smaller farmers can not purchase on a large scale to receive the cost savings that are associated with bulk purchases -- fertilizer, seeds, land, etc -- as a large conglomerate can. It also means that the labor is limited, since the local farmer usually can't afford to hire more than a few people to work the land with them. -- Dorothy McGee

[[Category:Microecon|What is a Market?]]

Notes-Module 2 What is a Market?
What is a Market?

It is defined as " a regular gathering of people for the purpose and sale of provisions, livestock, and other commodities."

I believe it is an exchange for something with money or services. Its when parties engage in exchanging or trading.

In Economics, a market is one of a variety of systems used whereby parties engage in some sort of exchange.

Jay
