Return to [[Microecon:Main|the list of lectures]].
<br><br>
**The lecture notes are a collaborative effort of the participants in the course. You are not required to contribute to the lecture notes, but are encouraged to do so. Together, we can create resources that will be helpful to everyone.**
<br><br>
Wk 2 Outline:


Demand based on:
1) Price of item
2) Price of related goods (associated items & substitute items)
3) Buyer's income
4) Preferences / Taste
5) # of buyers
6) Buyer expectations

All except #1 move the demand curve.  For #1, no change in demand, just slide along curve.

Demand Schedule - table of price vs. demand
Demand Curve - graph of price vs. demand

If there's a change in price, the value stays the same, and the demand stays the same, but the quantity / consumption will change.

A change in the price of a related good yields a change in the demand curve itself (move right or left, depending if it's an associated item or substitute item, and if that price increased or decreased).

Price of associated good goes up, then demand for main item goes down. (This will shift the demand curve to the left)
Price of substitute good goes up, then demand for main item goes up also. (This will shift the demand curve to the right)

If buyer's income increases, the demand curve will shift to the right; the buyer will buy more quantity, at the same price, if it's a "normal" good.  If it's an inferior good (like ramen noodles), then the demand curve will shift ot the left, consumption (at the same price) will decrease.

Supply based on:
1) Price of item
2) Price of inputs (cost to bring to market)
3) Technology
4) # of sellers
5) Seller expectations

Remember, these curves shift left and right (not up and down).  An increase in supply, would move the curve to the right, etc.

A line of buyers (movie theater, store, etc.) is a SIGNAL - the price could be too low!
A lack of buyers is also a SIGNAL - the price could be set too high!

Get familiar with latin term: "ceteris paribus" which means "hold everything else constant in this comparison"

Examples:

1) Price of bread increases:
The demand for bread will decrease, and assuming some people like bread and tomatotes together, will then decrease demand for tomatoes also.  The demand curve shifts to the left.  Supply curve - no change (remember what drives the supply curve)

Result: quantity of tomatoes sold will decrease, and we know the price will be lower as well.

2) Price of bell peppers decreases:
Assuming some people substitute bell peppers for tomatoes, then the demand for tomatoes will decrease (some people will use the bell peppers due to lower prices, instead of tomatoes.  Supply - no change.

Result: since demand curve decreased (left), and no change to supply curve, the quantity of tomatoes sold will decrease, as will the price.

3) Preference - the weather is bad:
Let's assume that people don't like to buy tomatoes when the weather is bad (they don't go to the market).

Result: demand is less (left), and no change to supply curve.  The quantity of tomatoes sold goes down, and the price does also.

4) Two factors:
a) price of gasoline goes up
b) weather is bad

Taking separately:
a) Price of gas (input for supply) goes up.  So the price of the item (tomatoes) goes up also, and the quantity therefore goes down.  This results in a supply curve going to the left.
b) Weather is bad means the consumers buy less due to preferences (see last exmaple) and the price and quantity both go down.  This results in a demand curve going to the left.

Result:
With the demand and supply curves both moving to the left, we know the new equilibrium point will be to the left, so the quantity sold will be less.  But we don't know enough about the magnitude of the changes to comment on the price - it could go up or down.
