Return to [[Microecon:Main|the list of lectures]].
<br><br>
**The lecture notes are a collaborative effort of the participants in the course. You are not required to contribute to the lecture notes, but are encouraged to do so. Together, we can create resources that will be helpful to everyone.**
<br><br>
Welfare can be measured in dollars

Consumer Surplus (CS)

CS = What the customer is willing to pay (WTP) - Price

WTP (Willing to Pay) is the value to customer.

If you're willing to pay $100 for something, and the item's price is only $20, then you, the consumer, have a surplus of $80.  (A Consumer Surplus can't be negative - the transaction will simply not take place!)

CS can be represented by the area between the demand curve and the horizontal line at the sale price (triangle)

Producer Surplus (PS)

PS = Price - What price the seller is willing to sell at (WTS)

WTS (Willing to Sell) is the lowest dollar amount that the seller will accept for the item.  Usually tied to the cost, and to the value to them (if they're going to throw it away, the WTS will be quite low, regardless of the cost they incurred, etc.)  (A Producer Surplus can't be negative - the transaction will simply not take place!)

Producer Surplus can be represented by the triangular area between the supply curve and the horizontal line of the price (triangle above supply curve).

Total welfare of Society is the Consumer Surplus + the Producer 

Surplus

This is the area bounded by the price line and the supply and demand 

curves on the left side of the X.  Useful to represent it as a 

rectangle and a triangle (if the supply crosses X-axis).

Price Floor

This is an artificial boundary (could be created by the government) that states the minimum price an item can be bought for.  An excellent example is the minimum wage.  Workers are selling their labor for a price, and sometimes the government will set a minimum, with the intention of helping the masses get back on their feet.

The market of supply and demand would like to meet at the real equilibrium point (below the price floor) but this is not possible.

Price Ceiling

Similar idea to Price Floor, but this is the max price.  Excellent example given was resale of entertainment tickets.  The government may limit how much people can receive when reselling tickets (possibly to protect consumers from fraud?  not sure why else)

Deadweight Loss - the loss of surplus from a price floor or ceiling

There are also Quantity Controls (quotas) that are similar to price controls - but only an upper limit.  Fishing limits and taxi licenses are examples.  Learn more in the tutorial!

Tutorial also has info on Excise Taxes and Tariffs.  Examples of excise tax would be taxes on cigarettes, gasoline, etc.  The incidence of a tax is who really pays it - could be the buyer and the seller in the same transaction.

All sorts of gems in the tutorial -- The part of the market (buyer or seller) with greater price inelasticity will bear the greater burden of the tax.

Inelastic Demand - change the price as you like, the quantity won't change much.

Basically, inelastic = more vertical line.  (Supply or demand)
