Return to [[Microecon:Main|the list of lectures]].
<br><br>
**The lecture notes are a collaborative effort of the participants in the course. You are not required to contribute to the lecture notes, but are encouraged to do so. Together, we can create resources that will be helpful to everyone.**
<br><br>
Monopoly: 1 seller, unique product, examples: utility provider
Oligopoly: Few sellers, somewhat unique products, examples: airlines, oil producers
Monopolistic Competition: Many sellers, somewhat unique products, examples: retail items, foods

In order to have some qualitites of monopolies, such as price control, one must have Market Power:

Market Power sources:
* Ownership of Resource (land)
* Technological Advantage (unique software)
* Patents or Government protection
* Product Differentiation (style, location, quality, advertising)

When a firm has differentiation, they will produce less output.

Price Discrimination: Charging different prices for the same good to different customers.  This requires two things: 1) market power 2) must prevent resale of item to other buyers

Perfect price discrimination examples: car dealership sales, financial aid packages

Imperfect Price Discrimination examples: happy hour, movie theater ticket sales, coupons in newspaper, airline tickets (business vs personal/leisure, these two divided by amount of time between flight and purchase, and the day of the week traveled)

Examples of pricing strategies:

Bundling (software, cable tv channels), find lowest price for each category, bundle them together.  Not always, but possible to make more Total Revenue

Two-Part Tariff (health club, cell phone), entry fee and recurring fee

Three market failures this course will cover: 1 Monopolies 2 Public goods 3 Externalities

Quantity Effect: the increase in Total Revenue associated with increase in quantity sold.

Pricing Effect: the decrease in Total Revenue associated with decrease in price.

For Monopolies, the Marginal Revenue and the Price are not the same, also, the Marginal Revenue Curve is always below the demand curve (hence the extra markup they can charge).

Monopoly does three things:
1. Charges more
2. Earns a positive economic profit (which a firm would not in a perfect market)
3. Produces lower quantity

A monopoly creates a deadweight loss due to the lower quantity being produced.
