Return to [[Microecon:Main|the list of lectures]].
<br><br>
**The lecture notes are a collaborative effort of the participants in the course. You are not required to contribute to the lecture notes, but are encouraged to do so. Together, we can create resources that will be helpful to everyone.**
<br><br>
Questions to categorize goods:
1. Does my consumption of this good affect anyone elses consumption?  (Rivalry)
2. Can I prevent someone from using the good?  (Excludability)

Rivalry / Excludability chart:

Yes / Yes:
Private Goods - market does a good job distributing these
Example: pants, most things

Yes / No:
Common Resource
Examples: public parks, clean water, highway, fishing

No / Yes:
Club Goods
Example: Cable TV

No / No:
Public Good
Examples: National Defense, Voting

Public Good Game:
Each player can choose to contribute to the public good or keep wealth for themselves.  The payout is better for an individual to keep their wealth, even if the payout is BEST when everyone contributes fully.  No reason to contribute if all others are contributing (you still get the public pot) - this brings forth the Free Rider problem.  A tax evader still benefits from national defense, despite not paying for it.  No cost for TV consumption, until advertising was added, now all pay by virtue of watching - good private industry solution to public good.  Not perfect (Tivo, etc.)

Common Resources exhibit the Tragedy of Commons Problem:
Tragedy of Commons arises because there aren't any property rights.  One example is fishing - if all ppl fish uncontrolled, then they will each get to eat for the night, but there won't be any fish left for next time.  This is regulated by quotas / licenses.  Another example is highway congestion, which is solved with variable pricing in some places - and shown to work fairly well.

Requirements for Externalities:
1. An Agent engages in an activity which (negatively or positively) changes the welfare of another agent.
2. The change in welfare goes uncompensated.

Negative Externalities: Pollution, smoking in public, alarm system safety
Positive Externalities: Home improvement, vaccines

The supply curve does not take into account social costs of production, only private costs of production.  These social costs are hard to quantify.  If we do take them into account, the supply curve shifts up (left) and the new equilibrium point is exhibits a higher price, as well as a lower quantity.  Bummer for buyer and seller, but better for general public / social benefit.

Solving Externalities:
Coase Theory says that as long as we assign property rights, the externality can be corrected.  Can't often be used becasue the transaction costs are too high to bring parties to the table (imagine paying tenths of pennies for an action, despite the costs in aggregate being large).  In these cases, the only solution is government intervention.

Government Intervention options to correct Negative Externalities:
1. Taxes
2. Permits
3. Regulations
