<div id="content">
				<a id="top"></a>
	        		        	<h1 id="firstHeading" class="firstHeading">Humanphysio:Transcript Lecture 10-4</h1>
				<div id="bodyContent">
		            <h3 id="siteSub">From Coursera</h3>
		            <div id="contentSub"></div>
		            		            		            					<!-- start content -->
					<div lang="en" dir="ltr" class="mw-content-ltr"><h1> <span class="mw-headline" id="10-4_Urinary_System:_Regulation_of_Fluid_Balance">10-4 Urinary System: Regulation of Fluid Balance</span></h1>
<p>Greetings. So this is our fourth lecture about the kidney. And today, we want to talk about its regulation of fluid balance. And as you recall from the GI lectures, we said that in a given day, we ingest about two liters of of foodstuffs, which will be consisting of different types of electrolytes, and different amounts of fluid. And it's the kidney's job then to balance these electrolytes and to balance the fluid which is within the body. So it's going to regulate then the size of the ECF volume, and the content of the ECF volume. So our specific learning objectives then for today are, one, we want to contrast the function of the juxtamedullary and cortical nephrons. And we've not talked about how there are, in fact, two different types of nephrons within the kidney, but we will do so in just a few minutes. Secondly, we want to explain the change in permeability along the renal tubules to ions and to water. And third, we're going to to explain the importance of the osmotic gradient that's present within the kidney medulla. Four, we want to explain what's known as RAAS. This is the Renin-angiotensin-Aldosterone System, and the conditions that activate it. And five, we're going to explain the hormonal regulation of ECF volume and osmolarity. And six, we want to talk about diuresis which is an increase in urine output, and to explain the different causes of diuresis. Okay, so there you have quite a bed of topics to cover, so let's begin. </p>
<p>So, the first thing that we want is to keep in mind as we're going through this section of the course is that the kidneys can conserve water, but they can't replenish water. So, whenever there is a dehydration state or a loss in volume, you must bring water into the body by the thirst mechanism and that is to drink water. And only the water that is excreted by the kidney can be regulated. So what do we mean by that? So, when you sweat, you lose water, when you have when you defecate you lose water, And when you're simply breathing, you lose water because you have water vapor that's within the air that's going in and out of the lung. But those are really minor amounts of water that's being lost from the body in under normal circumstances. And it's the water that's being excreted by the kidney, which can be regulated. So if the body is in need of keeping water, that is it has dehydration states or it's close to a dehydration state, it's able to move water from the filtrate back into the blood. But under conditions where we have too much volume, that is we have a hypervolemic state, then under those conditions the kidney is able to pee out the extra water. So the kidney can be regulated and of course when we regulate, we are going to use a hormonal system, and we'll talk about that in a few minutes. </p>
<p>The other thing we need to keep in mind is that normal urine, the osmolarity is going to change with the body's needs. And this is an important point, and that's what's shown here. So, as we look in this table, as you filter materials and it enters into Bowman's capsule, then the material's 300 milliosmoles. It's the same as the osmolarity of the blood, so it's the same as the osmolarity of the plasma. And in a given day, we filter 180 liters per day. Remember that's the normal GFR or Glomerular Filtration Rate for a normal person. However, by the time we get to the end of the collecting duct and we have our final urine, we're only putting out 1.5 liters a day, and that means we have to reabsorb all of this other fluid across these renal tubules. And in addition to that, as you see, the osmolarity of the output, the final urine, can be very dilute. That is 50 milliosmoles all the way up to highly concentrated urine, which is 1200 milliosmoles. </p>
<p>So, let's look at how the kidney is able to manage to do these things. So the first thing we have to be introduced to is that the kidney has two types of nephrons, one which is sitting out in the cortex which is underneath the capsule. And the second, which dives down deep into the medulla, sends this renal tubule deep into the medulla, which is the more central region that's surrounding the ureter. So, these nephrons which are sitting mostly within the cortex are called cortical nephrons. And the nephrons which are sitting between the cortex and the medulla at that junction, where part of the nephron is sitting in the in the cortex. And it has a lot of it's renal tubules, which are descending deep into the medulla, these are called the juxtamedullary nephrons, juxta meaning next to, so it's next to the medulla. The other thing that we have to keep in mind is that in the cortex, all of the interstitial fluid is 300 milliosmoles. So outside of these tubules, they're surrounded by an environment which is 300 milliosmoles. But in the medulla, there is a standing osmotic gradient. And that gradient starts at 300 at the cortex medulla junction, and it increases to 1200 milliosmoles deep within the medulla. And this is going to be an important point for allowing these nephrons then to be able to concentrate urine. Because we must have an osmotic gradient in order to move water from within the renal tubule and out of the renal tubule and in back into the blood because water only moves by osmosis. </p>
<p>So I've diagrammed the tubule here. So let's start at the beginning. So we have Bowman's capsule, and that's this area. And the Bowman's capsule is being fed by an afferent arteriole, going into the glomerulus, and then it's drained by the efferent arteriole. The beginning of the tubule is the proximal convoluted tubule, and that's this thick portion which is descending down through the cortex down into the medulla. The fluid that is within the proximal convoluted tubule has a osmolarity of 300. It's the same as the filtrate well it's the same as the plasma. And all of the materials that were moving across the proximal convoluted tubule is 300 is isosmotic movement of materials. So it is 300 within the lumen of the tubule, and is 300 outside within interstitial space. </p>
<p>As the tubule descends we enter into the thin loop of Henle, and in the thin loop of Henle now, the permeability of the cells which are lining the renal tubule changes. And in this region, water is able to exit from the the area. That is, we have aquaporin channels which are still present within the luminal surfaces of these cells, but that sodium can no longer exit. So the sodium now is not able to follow the water, or the water is not moving with sodium. Instead water is moving by osmosis down its concentration gradient because as the tubule is descending, we're going from 300 to 600 to 900 to eventually 1200 milliosmoles within the interstitial space. So water is simply moving down its osmotic gradient. But by having water moving down the osmotic gradient, it means that the concentration of solutes, and in particular the sodium, within the tubule itself is increasing, such that if they achieve 1200 milliosmoles within the renal tubule at the end of the loop of Henle. And then, as we start to ascend up to the thick loop of Henle (and that's the tall), when we enter into the thick Loop of Henle, along the luminal surfaces of these cells, there are no aquaporin channels. These cells are always impermeable to water. Water can not leave the renal tubule and move across the cells, either in a paracellular or a transcellular manner. So under these circumstances, then, water stays within the renal tubule. </p>
<p>But now we're going to be moving the sodium, chloride and potassium out of the renal tubule and into the interstitial space. And we're using again a a cotransporter, so it's going to be a symporter that's moving potassium, sodium, and two chlorides. The movement of this material, then into the interstitial space adds to the gradient which is in the interstitial space. So, we're essentially refreshing the amount of salts that are within the interstitial space. Then, the material that is within the tubule gets to the point where its actually hypo-osmotic, so it has 100 milliosmoles, as it's increasing, as it's flowing back towards the cortex. That's within the tubule. and outside of the tubule, we then have all of the salt that's been pushed out into the interstitial space. If the renal tubule remains without aquaporin channels, that is no aquaporin channels are inserted in the distal convoluted tubule or within the collecting ducts, then the material that's being removed from the body will have an osmolarity that's a 100 milliosmoles. So, it's going to be a very dilute urine which is going to be leaving the the kidney. And because we can't concentrate this urine, the amount of urine that's leaving will be 18 liters per day.</p>
<p>And that is what we saw when we had the individual who had diabetes insipidus. These are individuals who could not make antidiuretic hormone. And the antidiuretic hormone is responsible for putting the aquaporin channels into the collecting duct and into the distal convoluted tubules. So we do have 18 liters per day, and a very dilute 100 miliosmolar concentration within the urine. Okay, so, but let's also look at the blood that's flowing along these tubules because I told you that the blood, this peritubular capillary, the second capillary that is really important in maintaining and in picking up the material that is being moved out of the tubules and into the interstitial space. </p>
<p>So let's follow the blood. So, as we leave the glomerulus then, we have the efferent arteriole, and it moves into the peritubular capillary. And notice the peritubular capillary is aligning along the renal tubule, but it's following first, it's following the tall, the thick ascending loop and it's descending down into the medulla. And as it's descending down into the medulla, it picks up the salt that's coming from the renal tubule. So that within the blood, in the cortex the blood has 300 milliosmoles, but as it's descending with the medulla, the blood osmolarity is increasing. Such that it goes from 300 to 600 to 900 and eventually 1200 milliosmoles, down at the bottom of the curve. Then, as the blood starts to ascend back towards the cortex, its picking up water. And so it dilutes the 1200 to 900, and then to 600, and then eventually to 300. Such that by the time the blood returns to the cortex, it now is again isosmotic to the cortex interstitial fluid space. It's 300. And then it's 300 as it leaves the organ. </p>
<p>Because this loop is so important to the function of the medulla that maintaining this gradient of the medulla has a special name. And so, in the medulla, that second capillary is called a vasa recta. And why is it important? It's important because it is maintaining the gradient. It's not washing the gradient out. If the blood simply ran straight through the gradient, it would pick up all the salt and then carry it out of the kidney. But by having a loop, then the salt is able to equilibrate back and forth across these regions and across these tubules as does water. And so that the blood then, is able to maintain the gradient, as it's going deep into the medulla and then coming back out toward the cortex and that's the vasa recta. Okay, so that's how the kidney tubules work. and, so let's see when we add vasopressin. So as we said, if you add vasopressin, you're going to insert these aquaporin channels into the luminal surface of the collecting duct in the distal convoluted tubules. And when that occurs, now water can leave the tubule and move into the interstitial space. So in the cortex, the gradient, then, for water movement is that we have 100 milliosmoles within that distal region. And outside we have 300 milliosmoles, and so if we insert the aquaporin channels, water moves down its concentration gradient by osmosis. Within the cortex and then obviously, when we move in the collecting duct as it moves into the medulla, you're going from 300 to 600 to 900 to 1200. Water again can move by osmosis. And having water moving out of the renal tubule, then, allows us to decrease the volume of the urine. So when instead of 18 liters per day, we're putting out one and a half liters per day. And if we can change the concentration of the urine, such that the urine can become very concentrated up to 1200 milliosmoles. </p>
<p>Now aldosterone is a second hormone that can regulate that distal convulated tubule region and the collecting duct. And it does fit so by acting on those principle cells. So the principle cells in this region, of the DCT and the collecting duct are target cells for aldosterone. Aldosterone will be increased, the secretion of aldosterone increases when we have an increase in the concentration of potassium within the blood. But aldosterone can also be increased if there is a loss in volume within the blood. And we'll talk about that in just a second. What aldosterone is doing is, as we just mentioned, that aldosterone is moving sodium from the lumen across the cells and into the blood space. And in exchange, potassium is leaving, but water can follow can follow the sodium provided antidiuretic hormone is present, and that we've inserted the aquaporin channels. So, that means we need to coordinate then the activity of aldosterone with antidiuretic hormone if we're trying to change the volume of the body, that is if there's low blood pressure or low volume in the body. Then these two hormones working together can move sodium and water back into the body from the renal tubule. And so, and that's, coordination is done by the kidney, and that's what's shown on the next slide. </p>
<p>So this coordination of these of the hormonal loops is called a RAAS system, or the Renin-angiotensin-II-Aldosterone System. So, renin is a hormone which is secreted from the kidney and it is secreted, as you recall, when the tubule senses low volume or low pressure within the tubule, the macula densa that's sitting within the thick ascending loop of Henle, then feeds back in a paracrine manner to the juxtamedullary cells, and causes the afferent arteriole juxtamedullary cells to dilate. That increases the pressure within the tubules, so it takes care of local autoregulation of pressure within the tubule, but at the same time renin is secreted by the JG cells or the juxtamedullary cells. That renin acts on angiotensin I. It acts on a protein which converts it to angiotensin I, and angiotensin I is then converted to angiotensin II by an enzyme. It's called the angiotensin II converting enzyme, or ACE. Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor. And angiotensin II also has two two other functions. And one is that it increases aldosterone secretion from the adrenal, so we now are releasing aldosterone into the system. And secondly, it feeds back to the hypothalamus to the posterior pituitary, and causes the release of antidiuretic hormone, or vasopressin. Vasopressin, again, will work on the kidney, on the renal tubules to move water, it inserts its aquaporin channels and moves water across the collecting duct. And aldosterone is going to work in the same region to move sodium across that region, from the filtrate back into the blood. So we're moving volume, we're moving fluid from the renal filtrate back into the blood. So the plasma volume will increase. In addition, as you know, antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin) is a potent vasoconstrictor, and so is angiotensin II, so these are both very potent vasoconstrictors. And our problem was, that we had low blood pressure and by increasing the presence of vasoconstrictors within the system, the venous return will increase and we'll move the blood back to the heart to aid in a preload. So we're filling the heart then by increasing venous return. So we're correcting then the systemic low blood pressure as well as correcting the flow rates that are within the system. So it's a coordination then of the two systems. One is local and then that's within the renal tubule itself, and secondly we are taking care of low blood pressure within the systemic (the rest of the body). </p>
<p>Now we can have a case where we have an excess volume. and to this condition, then you'll want to turn off antidiuretic hormone. Okay, there will be no secretion of antidiuretic hormone and you will in fact increase the amount of volume that's within the blood stream. So you can increase atrial stretch in the heart. So the atria of the heart, the cardiac muscle cells of the atria are endocrine cells, and when they are stretched, they will secrete a hormone which is called atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), it works on the kidney to increase GFR. So it causes a vasodilation of the afferent arteriole. The afferent arteriole opens, and we then have higher hydrostatic pressure, higher GFR, higher filtration rate. Because we increase not only the GFR, that is the filtration rate, but we're also decreasing the reabsorption of sodium in response to ANF or of the atrial natriuretic factor. So under these conditions then, more volume is going to stay within the renal filtrate and more volume will be excreted into the urine. So we will have an increase then, of urine output. </p>
<p>So does this ever happen in real life? Well it actually does. I have I had a post doc a couple years ago whose wife is a nurse, and she was trying to help him get rid of the kidney stones. Kidney stones are very painful. They sit there, they get lodged within the ureter, and he was trying to flush it out by drinking a lot of fluid. So she gave him a couple of liters of water to drink. And as he was drinking all this fluid, he was doing it very rapidly. And what he managed to do is to decrease the blood osmolarity, so that his blood osmolarity which is, as you remember, is the sodium concentration within the plasma. He decreases it to less than 280 milli osmoles, and that then shut down antidiuretic hormone, of course, because we have an excess of water. But also now, he has an excess of water outside of the cells, so the water now by osmosis starts to enter the cells. So water's moving from the ECF into the ICF. And by doing so the neurons in the brain start to swell. He became sort of disoriented, he was sort of loopy, and he had trouble walking. She got very upset and got very nervous about this whole situation and plopped him into the car and drove him straight to the ER, and they had to then give him salt, alright, so. Pee out the water. They give him a diuretic to get rid of the water, and they have to give him some salt in order to balance out his blood osmolarity. You can actually have too much water and it can be lethal. And that occurred a few years ago where a mother was punishing her child. And she was giving him so much water to drink, too quickly that he actually died. </p>
<p>All right, so the last point that we want to talk about is diuresis. And this is when there is a loss of body water to the urine, which is greater than one milliliter per minute. There are several factors that can give us diuresis. One is if there's an excess of water which we just discussed, and that is that we have decreased the osmolarity of the plasma. Or we increase the blood volume and this will then lead to a decrease in the antidiuretic hormone. As the antidiuretic hormone decreases, aquaporin channels are removed from the collecting duct epithelial cells, luminal surfaces, and water now stays within the tubule. And the output of urine increases. The second is osmotic diuresis, and with the osmotic diuresis, we have osmotically active substances, such as glucose which remain within the renal tubule. And this of course is not under normal circumstances. So, now we have this glucose within the renal tubule, it holds water, it's osmotically active, and then of course our urine volume is going to increase. And then the last is, we have these drugs which are called diuretics. And the diuretics increase the loss of body water primarily by inhibiting the sodium reabsorption by the renal tubule. And that means that the sodium then stays within the renal tubule. It cannot cross the collecting duct epithelial cells, or we have prevented the movement across the thick ascending loop of Henle. And under these circumstances then, a lot of that sodium stays within the renal tubule, and as it's delivered then to the collecting ducts, water stays within these renal tubule, and we have an increase in in urine output. </p>
<p>So what are our key concepts then? So the first is that we have two thirds of the body's water is in the ICF, and one third is in the ECF, and these two fluid compartments are in osmotic balance. The second is that the kidney's primary functions are to maintain body fluid volumes by regulating the salt balance, and to maintain the osmolarity of the body by regulating the water balance. And if there is a problem with osmolarity within the fluid compartments, there is a problem of water, not a problem of salt. Third, reabsorption and secretion of water and solutes is going to be governed by gradients and secondary active transport. We cannot move water without an osmotic gradient, and that's the important thing to remember. Four, hormones will regulate the osmolarity of the body. And that is, if we have too high of an osmolarity, the sodium concentration of the plasma increases, then the posterior pituitary will secrete antidiuretic hormone. When the body fluid volume is low, then under these conditions we will also have antidiuretic hormone released and aldosterone, and this could be through the RAAS System. But we could also have a direct release of antidiuretic hormone if we have low volume, that is at least 10% of the total body volume. And under these conditions, then of course, aldosterone retains sodium and antidiuretic hormone is retaining water. And so those two moieties move across the cells, we increase body volume, and we're going to increase blood pressure. If we have an excess of fluid within the body, then we have the atrial natriuretic factor, which will be released, because it will have too much volume within the bloodstream. It will stretch the atria and under these conditions, ANF is released. This will increase GFR, and by increasing GFR and decreasing sodium absorption, then we will excrete a lot of urine. And five, then an increased urine excretion above one milliliter per minute is called diuresis. And there are several causes to diuresis. One is that we can have an excess of water. A second is that we have an osmotic material that's within the renal tubule, and it's changing the gradients across the renal tubules for the movement of water. And lastly, we have diuretics, and the diuretics are essentially working by changing the osmotic balance. The diuretics inhibit the movement of sodium across the renal tubules. Sodium stays within the tubule. Water stays within the tubule, and we cannot concentrate urine. And this is actually an important point. That the diuretics can work at multiple levels within the renal tubule. They can work within the thick ascending Loop of Henle, and they can also work within the distal convoluted tubule and within the collecting ducts. So we have different types of diuretics which are available. but in each case, what we're doing is we're changing the reabsorption of sodium. We're inhibiting the reabsorption of sodium, and by doing so, water stays within the tubule, and you increase the amount of urine that's put out by the body. </p>
<p>Okay, so the next time we come in here then, we're going to talk about how the kidney regulates the acid based balance for the body. Okay, so see you then.</p>

<!-- 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor node count: 2/1000000
Post-expand include size: 0/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 0/2097152 bytes
Expensive parser function count: 0/100
-->


</div><div class="printfooter">
Retrieved from "<a href="https://share.coursera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Humanphysio:Transcript_Lecture_10-4&amp;oldid=11142">https://share.coursera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Humanphysio:Transcript_Lecture_10-4&amp;oldid=11142</a>"</div>
					<div id='catlinks' class='catlinks catlinks-allhidden'></div>					<!-- end content -->
									</div>
			</div>