<div id="content">
				<a id="top"></a>
	        		        	<h1 id="firstHeading" class="firstHeading">Humanphysio:Transcript Lecture 5-5</h1>
				<div id="bodyContent">
		            <h3 id="siteSub">From Coursera</h3>
		            <div id="contentSub"></div>
		            		            		            					<!-- start content -->
					<div lang="en" dir="ltr" class="mw-content-ltr"><h1> <span class="mw-headline" id="5-5_Respiratory_System:_Oxygen_Transport">5-5 Respiratory System: Oxygen Transport</span></h1>
<p>So we're kind of done talking about breathing, the process of getting fresh air into the lung. Now, we're going to focus more on oxygen specifically. 
And one thing that we need to consider is what is the pressure of oxygen in the alveoli. So, we can easily measure what the arterial pressure is of oxygen and CO2 and we would refer to this as P little a. But we also want to know what's the pressure of oxygen in the alveoli, which is big A, P big A, O2. And so, we calculate this alveolar pressure of oxygen using the alveolar gas equation. And it's got a couple, a few components to it. So, the first portion of the alveolar gas equation is going to consider what is the content of the oxygen in the air that you're breathing? So what's the fraction of inspired air that is oxygen, which we said is going to be 0.21? What's the atmospheric pressure that you're breathing? And then remember we've got to subtract out for the pressure of the water vapor that's going to get added. As the air enters the lung. So we've talked about last session how that pressure was going to be 150 millimeters of mercury if you're at sea level. However, the air in the lung is also going to contain much more carbon dioxide than just normal atmospheric air. And so we need to accommodate for that in determining what the pressure of oxygen's going to be in the alveoli. And again it's going to be very hard, just like it's hard to measure the alveolar oxygen pressure. It's going to be hard to measure the alveolar carbon dioxide pressure. So instead, since it's usually going to be the same as arterial carbon dioxide pressure. We're going to use that as an approximation. So that the pressure of oxygen is going to be reduced by because of carbon dioxide being present in the alveoli. The third factor in the alveolar pressure of oxygen is going to be what's called the respiratory quotient, which is shown as RQ down here. Which is going to be the ratio of CO2 produced versus oxygen consumed. And this is going to vary depending on your diet. But for most of us on a mixed diet of a mixture of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, that respiratory quotient is going to be 0.8. Where more oxygen is being consumed than CO2 is being produced. And so, again, that's going to affect how much oxygen is going to be in, present in those alveoli. So this bottom portion is just alking about what I just said, where it's going to. Be determined by, what's the pressure of oxygen in the air that you're breathing. How much you're breathing which is going to be reflected in the arterial CO2 pressure. And then what's your diet and how is that affecting oxygen consumption versus CO2 production. So the reason why this is going to be so important is, because under normal circumstances in a normal lung, the alveolar pressure is going to be is going to determine the arterial pressure of oxygen. So now lets switch gears just a little bit and talk about how ventilation is going to change the alveolar gas pressures for oxygen and CO2. So we've said that just at normal resting values that the alveolar partial pressure is going to be about 105 for oxygen, shown on this orange curve. And about 40 millimeters of mercury for CO2. And so if, if for some reason you stay, start hyperventilating, breathing more than you actually kind of need to. Let's say you're having some sort of panic attack and so you stit, start hyperventilating. Then that means you're going to start to increase your al, alveolar partial pressure for oxygen because you're taking in more air, more fresh air into the lung. And you're not using a different amount, an increased amount of oxygen. And the partial pressure of CO2 in the alveoli will decrease. Because now, CO pre-, CO2 production is less than alveolar ventilation. And so, in that way, CO2 will decrease during hyperventilation. Similarly you could have, for instance, take a certain type of drug and that could lead to hypoventilation, which is going to be, then when your breathing is going to be reduced. Then the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen will decrease but yet the partial pressure of CO2 in the alveolar will increase. So that CO2 production is now greater than alveolar ventilation and so as a result the pressure of CO2 increases in the alveolar during hypoventilation. Also, another thing to consider in this process is the fact that we're going to have blood rushing through these capillaries that are passing by the alveoli. And they're only going to have a certain amount of time in order to equilibriate with the air in the alveoli and so that's what this graph describes where it talks about the percent of capillary length. So if we consider 0%, this is where the blood is entering the lung, and then at 100% at the end of the capillary that's, that's next to the alveoli. This is where the blood is exiting the lung. We have just a certain amount of length of that capillary. And so this graph is looking at the pressure of oxygen in the blood in the capillary. And you can see it's, we know that blood returning to the lung is going to have a low pressure of oxygen because it's just come from tissues dropping off the oxygen at tissues. So the pressure of oxygen starting off is going to be about 40 millimeters of mercury. But you can see very quickly about 25% to 30% along the length of the capillary, we've already gotten the pressure of oxygen up to our maximum, 105 millimeters of mercury. So now that it's completely equilibrated with the gas and air in the lung, just only a quarter of the way along the capillary. So it's going to continue to travel along the alveoli and exit. But the point is that this equilibration happens very quickly which means that we have a large safety factor so that this is not going to be a limiting factor in terms of getting oxygen into the blood. So that even if we have extenuating exercise situations where it's we really need to get a lot of oxygen into the body. We still have enough safety factor that by the end, by the time that blood exists the capilaries of the lung, it should be back up to 105. Now, of course, there are going to be problems. There could be problems in diffusion, but without that sort of circumstance, normally there should not be a problem with that oxygen being able to get fully that blood getting fully oxygenated. And here this blue curve shows you what could happen in a diseased state. For instance, if the lung had water it in, if it had edema, so that the oxygen from the air had to first diffuse across that liquid and then get into the blood which is going to greatly slow down the rate of diffusion. Then this safety factor may not be enough and we may not be able to fully oxygenate the blood. Now, we're going to start talking about the blood side of carrying oxygen and we're going to start talking about hemoglobin which is going to be filling our red blood cells. It's a protein that's going to bind oxygen. So, we know if we have these two compartments, A and B, and let's say that they're separated by a membrane which is going to be fully permeable to oxygen. And so we know that the pressure of oxygen in these two compartments, in these two solutions is going to equilibrate. So you can see we've got six molecules of oxygen in compartment a and six in b so that the pressure of oxygen in the two compartments is equal. If we add hemoglobin right after we add it, and we're adding it only to compartment B. Then hemoglobin is going to rapidly bind the oxygen and even though we now have equal numbers of oxygen molecules in a and b that oxygen that bound that hemoglobin it no, no longer counts as. The pressure of oxygen in the gas, because it's no longer dissolved into the blood. And so that means at first, before we allow equilibration to happen, after we've added this hemoglobin, the pressure of oxygen in compartment A is greater than the pressure in B. When we talk about the pressure, we're only talking about the gas molecules dissolved in plasma, and these oxygen molecules bound to hemoglobin Then, are not dissolved in the plasma or the water anymore. Now, since the pressures are not equal, and that's what determines the diffusion. Then we are going to get some oxygen molecules moving over to compartment B to equalize the pressure. So now, once we've had equilibration in this last panel, we have the pressure of oxygen in both chambers is equal. We have two molecules per chamber that are dissolved in the plasma. However, the oxygen content of b is much higher. Because we've got 8 molecules of oxygen bound to these 2 hemoglobin molecules. And so, this is what's going to happen in blood. Where what we are, have been talking about. And what, in many ways, the body can detect. As oxygen in the blood is free oxygen. Dissolved in plasma. That ends up being only 1 to 2% of the oxygen in our blood. The vast majority Is oxygen bound to hemoglobin. So, you want to keep that in mind. We're talking about the pressures of oxygen in blood, but in reality that's a very small proportion of the oxygen. And if you want to calculate how much oxygen is in blood, you need to calculate the pressure of the oxygen, how much hemoglobin, and how saturated the hemoglobin is with oxygen in order to really calculate that. So, this is showing you what's going to happen now then. In this left panel we've got an alveolus here with air in it. And then we've got the capillary next door, and what is going to happen is, this oxygen in the lung alveoli is going to have a higher pressure than this blood that's just come from the tissues. And so, in that way. We're going to have diffusion of oxygen out of the alveolus into the capillary. Then the pressure in the capillary is going to be higher than the pressure of oxygen in the red blood cells that just came from the tissue. So now the oxygen's going to dissolve into the red blood cell. Or diffuse into the red blood cell. And then now hemoglobin can accept it. And when the hemoglobin binds it, that really removes it from being dissolved in the red blood cell,
 which means we're going to keep maintaining and. Ha, a gradient for oxygen to keep coming into the red blood cell, because the hemoglobin binds it and it kind of acts like a sink. So that it disappears from the contributing to the pressure in the red blood cell. Once the red blood cell gets to the tissue, then we're going to have a gradient because the tissues are going to have low oxygen content. So the oxygen is going to diffuse from the blood into the tissues, which is going to then lower the oxygen in the plasma itself. Which then provides a gradient so that the dissolved oxygen can lead the red blood cell and enter the blood and the tissues. And then, that's when oxygen will start being removed from the hemoglobin, so that we've got this kind of steady supply of oxygen that is continuing to cause a gradient so that oxygen is going to continue to diffuse. Into the blood, into the tissues. And then into the cells, which will also be using up that oxygen. We're going to switch gears a little bit. And talk about, more about the binding of oxygen to hemoglobin. So hemoglobin's going to be a protein that binds oxygen. And the way that it binds it is somewhat unique so that you can see as we increase the pressure of oxygen, we do not have just a linear curve with hemoglobin saturation. So that a linear line so it is a curve because binding is cooperative, meaning that once oxygen starts binding hemoglobin it changes the molecule. So then, it has even a higher affinity for more oxygen. And this is very useful in the body. So let's look out here. Well, we're looking at a, the pressure of oxygen that we know is in arterial blood about 100 millimeters of mercury. So at this pressure, hemoglobin is basically 100% saturated. So as that blood Is leaving the lung. Hemoglobin is completely loaded up with oxygen, which makes sense. By the time we get to the tissues, when we get to the venous pressure of oxygen we know that's about 40 millimeters of mercury. So we see that in the tissues, once we're unloading that oxygen, now hemoglobin as about 75% saturated. So just, kind of, at rest under normal conditions, blood leaving the lung is going to have hemoglobin being 100% saturated. Once it's leaving the tissues to go back and pick up more oxygen. It's still about 75% saturated. So again we have a large safety factor here where hemoglobin has plenty for oxygen that it can drop off. So if we look at a tissue like exercising muscle. In a local level the pressure in that tissue and the surrounding that tissue, the pressure of oxygen could get down to something like 15 millimeters of mercury. In that case, then hemoglobin would have dropped off more than would be only 30%. Saturated it would have dropped off about 70% of its oxygen. So, you can see right through here, the steepest part of the hemoglobin binding curve is where just a small change or small drop in the pressure of oxygen in the tissue will cause a large decrease in the saturation of hemoglobin. Which means that a lot of oxygen will be dumped just with a small drop. In oxygen and this is correlating to levels that you would see physiologically, that will be, allow tissues that are using more oxygen to receive more oxygen. The other important thing about this curve to notice is that when we're out here at 100 millimeters of mercury. That even if we went to a high altitude where the pressure of oxygen in the air could be 80 or even 60 millimeters of mercury, in those cases we're still saturating the hemoglobin more than 90%. So that we do have, obviously at altitudes such as Mount Everest this isn't true. But for just normal altitude changes, the hemoglobin is still going to be fairly close to being completely saturated, because of the way this curve is shaped. So we talked about how we, this curve along the curve if you change the pressure of oxygen you're going to effect the amount of saturation of hemoglobin. However, there are other factors and substances that when they're present are going to. Bind and affect hemoglobin so that the whole curve will shift one direction or another. And so if you have a left shift of that hemoglobin curve, then that is going to favor loading. Because at a certain pressure of oxygen then the saturation if you shift the curve to the left, is going to be higher. So like for instance, this purple curve, if we shift the curve to the left on this green curve then at a certain pressure. Of oxygen, the saturation is greater. So this is fav-, this is favoring loading. And one example of this would be fetal hemoglobin. Hemoglobin that's, expressed in fetuses. Where, Since their source of oxygen is going to be their mother's blood. Meaning they've got to draw oxygen away from hemoglobin. They express a fetal hemoglobin that is shifted to the left. It has a higher affinity for oxygen. Which means it's going to favor loading a fetal hemoglobin. So that it can pull the oxygen away from the maternal hemoglobin. The other factors we are going to talk about, are all going to cause a right shift, which is going to favor unloading. They're all going to occur in situations such as high amounts of muscle activity which is when you would want to shift the cure to the right to favor unloading. So these factors are going to be things like increased temperature, which is shown right here. Where, if you increase the temperature, then the curve shifts to the right, which is going to mean that at a certain pressure of oxygen. Hemoglobin is going to have released more oxygen. And unloaded more oxygen. This is also going to be true for increased pressure of CO2, which again is going to be a signal of high metabolic activity. As well as low PH, which is also going to be a signal of high metabolic activity. And this molecule called 2, 3 diphosphoglycerate, which is going to be produced by red blood cells, in situations where there needs to be more unloading of hemoglobin. So again, all these molecules and states like increased temperature are going to affect the molecule of hemoglobin. So that it's going to shift the curve to the right. So we've talked about how you can determine alveolar PO2, how you can calculate it, which is going to be determined by how much oxygen is in the air you're breathing. How frequently, what's your ventilation rate and what's the status of your diet. We've talked about how oxygen transport from the lung into the blood is normally not going to be limited by diffusion. That's not going to be a process that's going to limit the amount of oxygen in the blood, unless there's some sort of disease situation. And then we also talked about the role of hemoglobin and how it's so important in basically increasing the oxygen content in blood. Since it's not particularly soluble in blood on it's own which is reflected in the PO2.</p>

<!-- 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor node count: 2/1000000
Post-expand include size: 0/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 0/2097152 bytes
Expensive parser function count: 0/100
-->


</div><div class="printfooter">
Retrieved from "<a href="https://share.coursera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Humanphysio:Transcript_Lecture_5-5&amp;oldid=9741">https://share.coursera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Humanphysio:Transcript_Lecture_5-5&amp;oldid=9741</a>"</div>
					<div id='catlinks' class='catlinks catlinks-allhidden'></div>					<!-- end content -->
									</div>
			</div>