<div id="content">
				<a id="top"></a>
	        		        	<h1 id="firstHeading" class="firstHeading">Humanphysio:Transcript Lecture 4-4</h1>
				<div id="bodyContent">
		            <h3 id="siteSub">From Coursera</h3>
		            <div id="contentSub"></div>
		            		            		            					<!-- start content -->
					<div lang="en" dir="ltr" class="mw-content-ltr"><p><strong>Be careful! There are 2 words that were not always transcribed by the machine correctly: "arterial" and "arteriole." I tried to correct them all, but might have missed a few.</strong></p>
<h1> <span class="mw-headline" id="4-4_Circulatory_System">4-4 Circulatory System</span></h1>
<p>Greetings. So today, we're going to talk some more about the cardiovascular system, but we want to now start to look at the entire system. And that is the vasculature and how the pump then moves blood through the vasculature. This is a closed system, so we're going to be moving blood through closed vessels of different calibers and the blood is going to start at the heart, move through the vessels and return to the heart. So the heart is then going to set the pressure gradients within the system. And we have in fact two hearts in series. So we have two pumps in series. The second pump is the left ventricle and it is going to eject blood into the aorta. This is going to be the high pressure system. The left ventricle would generate usually about 120 millimeters of mercury in systole when it's contracting. 
The blood is injected into the aorta which is an elastic artery, and this elastic artery is able to stretch as the blood is coming into it and then, during diastole when the heart is relaxing and there's no blood being ejected from the heart, then there's a recoil of the walls of the aorta, and the recoil is maintaining the pressure gradient then within the arterial system. So the aorta then is an elastic artery, very large elastic artery, and from the aorta we have other elastic arteries of smaller caliber. These elastic arteries will flow into the muscular arteries. So the elastic arteries, and in fact the muscular arteries as well, are maintaining a pressure gradient within the system. So these are the faucets which are opening or closing to perfuse, for instance the kidney, versus the liver, versus the stomach. And the reason that we need these processes, is that we only have five liters of blood within the entire vasculature, and this is insufficient for perfusing all of these tissues at the same time (all of the organs at the same time). If we opened all of the organs to blood, then we would have an insufficiency and you would actually pass out. So the muscular artery, then, is allowing us to deliver blood to specific organs at specific times, and then distal to that we have the arterioles. The the blood now has entered into specific organs, and within these organs, the arterioles are the faucets which are allowing the blood to be distributed to specific regions within the organ. The organs are being perfused. That is, blood is being delivered to the organs in parallel, I'm sorry, not in series. So that it's in parallel, so that if I had perfusion to one organ, I can stop the perfusion to the other two, or I can perfuse to the three organs, without affecting the perfusion of any of the given organs. The arterioles are these little spigots within the organs and are going to allow us to distribute blood to specific regions. And downstream from the arterioles, we have the capillaries. The capillaries, or their very thin walls, and that capillary is going to allow for the diffusion of nutrients and the diffusion of gases across its walls. The capillaries are simply lined by an endothelium, a simple layer of cells, and this is going to be a low pressure region. And from the capillaries, we then drain into the venules, which are small bored structures. And the venules then will drain into a larger bore vessel which is the veins. The veins are going to bring the blood back to the heart. And the veins are on the low pressure side of the system and in order to move the blood back to the heart in a unidirectional manner, we have valves interposed within the veins. So the valves are going to prevent back flow, and the blood then will be returned to the 2 major veins, or the largest vein which is called the vena cava. You have the inferior vena cava which is bringing the blood from the bottom portions of the body, and you have the superior vena cava, which is delivering blood from the upper portion of the body to the heart. So the system then is moving the blood in a unidirectional manner. The blood then enters into the right atrium, and from the right atrium into the right ventricle. And this is deoxygenated blood which is then going to be delivered to the lungs. Again a low pressure system. And in the lungs, the blood becomes oxygenated, and then it moves to the left atrium. And from the left atrium to the left ventricle, and we start the cycle again. </p>
<p>There are a couple of rules that we have to keep in mind when we're talking about the cardiovascular system. 
<ul><li>And the first, then, is that we have bulk flow, and it's going to be moving from a high pressure to a low pressure state, and the high pressure state is set by the heart. 
</li><li>The second is that we'll have resistance to flow. This is an opposing flow as it's moving through the vessels. And there are 3 factors that are going to affect resistance. 
</li></ul>
--The first is the length of the tubes themselves, and this is essentially a fixed entity within an adult body. 
--Secondly, we have the radius of the tube. And the radius of the tube is a very critical factor in determining resistance within the system. The radius of the tube is actually to the fourth power, so this is a very important component, and it is what's going to allow us to close down the perfusion to the specific areas by vasoconstriction and to open perfusion to specific areas by vasodilation. 
--Lastly, we have the viscosity of the blood, and the viscosity of the blood is effectively set within a given individual, and it's only when we have conditions of dehydration or doping where we can actually change the viscosity of the blood. 
For the most part, of these three variables, the only one that we're really going to be considering is the radius of the two. The third rule is that the flow rate is going to be the volume of blood that passes through a given unit per time for time. So this is going to be liters per minute, and this is going to be determined by the pressure gradients and the resistance. Flow is going to be equal to delta p, that is the delta of the difference in the pressures, divided by the resistance. And this is the key equation, which describes this entire system. 
<ul><li>And lastly, we have the velocity of the blood. This is the speed by which the blood is moving through a given region, and this is going to be dictated by the cross-sectional area of the region. Within the entire system, we have the fewest number of vessels with the smallest diameter, the smallest radius are the arterioles. And therefore, they are the ones that are the spigots. The arterioles have a lot of smooth muscle in their walls, and they are able to close and to open and to regulate the blood flow. The capillaries are also very small in diameter, but there's many capillaries, and so we have a very large surface area of capillaries. And so as the blood flows from the atrial, which is at high speed moving into the capillaries. It slows at it goes across this very large cross-sectional area. And this is going to be really important because the blood is flowing through the capillaries. This is going to be our point of exchange of nutrients and the gasses with the tissues. </p>
</li></ul>

<p>So let's actually look at a diagram of the pressure as it's changing through the system. So we start then with the systolic pressure of 120 and a diastolic pressure of 80. And if you notice that the pressure is pulsatile. This is in the left ventricle and if we're looking down at the bottom, we're looking in the pulmonary circulation. So this would be coming off from the right ventricle into the lungs. So this would be the left ventricle coming into the aorta, right ventricle coming into the lung. Let's only consider the top portion of this graph. And as we're going across the first area we see that the amount of pressure remains pulsatile and the pressure is not falling. So we don't have a lot of resistance within the aorta or these first elastic arteries. They're wide bore tubes, so the resistance is low, but then once we move into the arterioles, that's when the pressure falls dramatically. The pressure is falling in the arterioles because again, they're few in number, small in diameter and so the arterioles are the affected pulses within the system. And then distal to the arterioles are the capillaries, and now the blood has lost its pulsatility, and that it is flowing at a much lower pressure. And once we enter into the venules and into the veins, the pressure is effectively zero coming back to the vena cava. How do you know whether or not you have an artery or vein? Well, the way you can tell is if you cut your wrist and the blood is spurting out, you've just cut an artery. But if you cut your wrist and the blood is oozing out, then you've cut the vein. So the pressure then is going to be decreasing as we go through these vessels and the pulsatility of the blood flow is going to be decreasing as we go through these vessels. </p>
<p>Now the pressures are systolic pressure to diastolic pressure, and that is difficult to talk about as we're talking about the pressure gradients within the system. And so we talk about the mean arterial pressure. So the mean arterial pressure then is not to simply taking the systolic pressure and the diastolic pressure, adding them together and dividing by two. And the reason is that the blood, that the heart is actually longer in diastole than it is in systole. And so we have to weigh the mean arterial pressure for this time event that we're more in diastole. So the mean arterial pressure is calculated as the diastolic pressure plus 1/3 (systolic pressure minus the diastolic pressure). And the systolic pressure minus the diastolic pressure is called the pulse pressure. The pulse pressure you can determine by simply taking your pulse. You can feel the beat (this is the systolic pressure) or by putting your hands up along the carotids on either side of your throat and you can feel the pulsing as the blood is rushing through these regions. So this is your pulse and you're feeling the beat that is the systolic pressure. The regulation of the blood going to the individual organs is going to be dictated then by the difference in pressure divided by resistance. So this is going to be the key concept. 
And the flow is going to be our cardiac output and that's going to be equal to mean arterial pressure minus the pressure of the vena cava for the entire system, divided by the total peripheral resistance, and they'll be for the entire system. Because the pressure in the vena cava is effectively zero, we then talk about mean arterial pressure divided by total peripheral resistance as a determinant of cardiac output. This is a key equation and you should memorize it. 
Secondly, in the organ, the perfusion to the organ will be dictated by the mean arterial pressure, that is the pressure coming to the particular organ minus the venous pressure of that organ. So it's the pressure entering into the organ (the arterial pressure) minus the pressure that's leaving the organ, which is the venous pressure. And that's going to be divided by the resistance of the organ. So this is then going to be the pressure then that's entering into the organ divided by the resistance to the organ. And that would be the near to your pressure coming into the specific organ. The amount of blood that enters into a given organ is going to be dictated by the artery which is feeding that particular organ. </p>
<p>So how do we control organ perfusion? </p>
<blockquote>
  <p>So local control of organ perfusion is going to be through the resistances, and it's by changing the resistance, and it can be both the artery as well as the arteriole, and we do this by several, several means. 
  *The first is the myogenic response and that is simply that if you stretch the vessel and it has smooth muscle around its walls, that you open the stretch activated mechanic receptors in the smooth muscle, calcium enters and you get a contractile event. So the myogenic response is that it's a stretch in the vessel, and is going to contract and you're going to reduce to the original radius of the vessel. 
  *The second type of response that we see is called hyperemia, and with hyperemia here we have metabolites which are being generated by the tissue that's being perfused. 
  --And if the tissue is active, such as if we're running or swimming and we're using our skeletal muscle, then we're generating a lot of CO2 and a lot of potassium on the outside of the cells. And we'll have a higher protons being delivered to the ECF or to the interstitial space around the cells. These increased metabolites will cause the smooth muscle of the arterioles in these regions then to relax, and we will increase perfusion. And this is simply to bring more oxygen into an area that's actively metabolizing. We also have what's called active hyperemia. 
  --We also have what's called reactive hyperemia. Reactive hyperemia is when we have a loss of perfusion to a specific area. The metabolites are going to be building up because we have metabolism going on in that region, but we don't have blood flow through the region to wash away these metabolites, and so they build up in higher concentration. And then when we actually open up the perfusion to this region, we're going to have a higher or greater amount of perfusion into the area. When would this occur? So just think about it. If we're going to take your blood pressure, we put a cuff on your arm and blow up the cuff so that the pressure within the cuff now exceeds the pressure within the artery that's feeding the forearm. Under these conditions, the artery is collapsed and we have no blood flow then, or going to the forearm. Then you slowly deflate the cuff, and the first the first noise that you hear, or the first movement of the needle, is the systolic pressure. So the systolic pressure now coming through that artery, and we have blood that is now perfusing the forearm, and then when the needle stops moving or you stop hearing a sound, then at that point, we have diastolic pressure. So the diastolic pressure now, the forearm is being completely perfused and the metabolites that had built up in this region during ischemia are now washed away. This first re-perfusion is going to have a very large re-perfusion, we're going to have vasodilation of the smooth muscle in the region, due to the build up of the metabolites. And the metabolites are the same as what we saw under active hyperemia, such as extracellular potassium, CO2 and protons. Under the condition where we are re-perfusing an area that had lost perfusion or went ischemic, it's called reactive hyperemia. So that's local control. 
  But we also have reflex control, and the reflex control is going to be through the sympathetic drive. And the sympathetic innervation to the smooth muscle that's around arteries or around arterioles is going to cause vasoconstriction by activating the alpha 1 adrenergic receptors. There are also hormones that can act as vasoconstrictors. One of them is vasopressin, another is epinephrine, and these will cause vasoconstriction of the smooth muscle around these vessels. To open the vessel we simple remove the sympathetic drive, decrease the sympathetic drive and the smooth muscle relaxes and the vessel then dilates. </p>
</blockquote>
<p>So let's look a little bit longer at these arterioles. So the arterioles are the faucets in the system. So what's diagrammed here is that we have, on the left, we have the artery feeding into the arteriole and then we have the capillary, which is downstream of that arteriole. And the condition, the blue line, we have our initial state. So the arteriole is partially open, and we're getting blood flow into the capillary. If we completely constrict the arteriole, what happens is that the pressure within the capillary falls, blood flow within the capillaries decreases and the pressure within the artery which is upstream of the arteriole then increases. 
This is exactly analogous to the hose that you have in your garden where you have a nozzle on the hose, and if you close that nozzle all the way down and turn up the water faucet, what will happen is that the hose will swell. And then as you open the hose a little bit, water will flow into the camp, into the garden, and the hose then will go down somewhat. So if you close your nozzle the hose swells and if you open the nozzle, the hose decreases in diameter. And the same thing is analogous to this system. So up stream artery is the hose, the nozzle is the arteriole, and the capillary bed is our garden. 
What happens if you vasodilate? So if we open the arteriole completely, then we have an increase in pressure and we move up to the green line. An increase in pressure in the capillary which is downstream of the arteriole in that we have a decrease in pressure within the artery which is upstream. And again, this is analogous to the hose. So we have our hose which is partially open and there's water flowing into the garden. But if you open it completely, then a lot of water is flowing into the garden. There's a much higher pressure going into the garden and the upstream hose now is much smaller in diameter. So exactly an analogous situation. So if you're never sure exactly what's happening to the pressures within these systems, then think of your analogy with the garden and the hose. And remember it's the arterioles which are the nozzles of the systems. The other thing that you should remember is that once we're going into the  the garden, the capillaries are effectively like soaker hoses. So we have a lot of very large cross-sectional areas, so the flow rate going through that region is going to be very slow. </p>
<p>So one last thing we need to think about, and that is the exchange across the capillaries. Coming into the capillaries we have an arteriole side and we have the venule side. The capillary is between these two regions. There are two pressures which are coming through the capillary. One is going to be our hydrostatic pressure. And that's going to be high on the arteriole side and low on the venule side. We're losing pressure as we go through the capillaries due to the resistance to flow. Secondly, we have a pressure which is known as the oncotic pressure, and this oncotic pressure is the pressure which is actually the attraction of water back into the blood. And that's due to the proteins which are present within the blood itself (that's the proteins within the plasma). On the arteriole side of the capillary, our hydrostatic pressure is greater than our oncotic pressure and we have what's known as filtration. So on this side, we actually have movement of fluid out from the blood out into the interstitial space, and that's what's shown here. This is fluid movement. We have small molecules, such as ions, nutrients and so forth, but the RBCs (the red blood cells) stay within the capillary itself. On the venule side, we have the opposite, where the hydrostatic pressure now is less than the oncotic pressure, and the attraction of fluid back into the capillary is occurring. And this is called re-absorption. So on the arteriole side of the capillary where we have a higher pressure, we're going to have filtration. Fluid is moving from the interior of the capillary, from the plasma, into the interstitial space. And on the venule side, we're going to have re-absorption of fluid back into the capillary. The change in the pressures across this region can affect whether or not we get filtration, and/or re-absorption. 
Let's consider a situation where we have the hydrostatin, we have oncotic pressure, which is constant across the capillary. But we have a hydrostatic pressure, which is now very high, all the way across the capillary  so that it's high on the arteriole side as well as on the venule side. This will be a situation where we hypertension for instance. So instead of having 120 milliliters of mercury for systolic pressures, maybe our systolic are 139 or 140, so much higher pressures coming into this particular region. What will happen is that we are going to have filtration on the arteriole side, but we also have filtration on the venule side, which means that the fluid that's moving out of the capillary and moving into the interstitial space. This is the space that's surrounding all of the tissues of the body that is surrounding all of the organs or within the organs. This space now is filling up with fluid, and the fluid is not able to get back into the capillary. And under these conditions, we have edema. 
So pressure across this capillary can change whether the movement of fluid, whether or not we have filtration and re-absorption, or whether we have only filtration occurring. And we end up with fluid being outside of the capillary, sitting within the tissues. </p>
<p>Now, there is one other circulatory system within the body which we haven't talked about and this is called the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system starts as blind-ended capillaries and it picks up this extra fluid that's out among the tissue spaces. So when I told you that we have filtration at one end of the capillary and we have re-absorption at the other end of the capillary, under normal conditions, there's a little mismatch, so that there's always a little extra fluid that's being pushed out into the tissues and bathing the tissues,  which is not being reabsorbed back into the capillary. That fluid is picked up by the lymphatic drainage, and this lymphatic drainage then delivers the fluid back to the heart, and that fluid is called lymph. The amount of fluid that's moving through the lymphatic systems is about three liters per day, and it is returned to the blood. So it maintains the cardiac volume, and that is our circulatory volume, which is five liters. The lymphatic drainage is everywhere in the body except for the CNS. So the lymphatic drainage then would be drainage that would pick up this extra fluid so that we would not form edema, and that the lymphatics would actually drain off the extra fluid that's within the tissue space. But if we clog the lymphatic drainage, if for some reason, that the lymphatic drainage has been damaged so that you can't return this fluids to the cardiovascular system, then the fluid stays within the extracellular space, so it can then increase either in the foot, in the ankles, or in the peritoneal cavity. </p>
<p>What are our general concepts? 
<ul><li>So the heart then consists of two pumps that drive the unidirectional flow of blood through the pulmonary system and then through the systemic circulations. 
</li><li>Secondly, we have a vascular system which is a conduit of blood and it's used  in a dynamic manner to deliver nutrients and gases to specific tissues depending upon the needs of the tissues and the organs of the body. 
</li><li>Thirdly, we have arteries which are low resistance conduits, and these are going to maintain the pressure during diastole. The initial pressure is generated in systole, and then the recoil of these elastic vessels, or elastic arteries, then maintains pressure during diastole, when blood is not being ejected from the heart. 
</li><li>Fourth, we have arterioles, and these are the dominant site to the resistance of flow. They are what determines what area of the organ is going to be perfused. 
</li><li>Five, we have capillaries. These are the sites for exchange of nutrients gases and so forth, and it's the balance of hydrostatic and oncotic forces that determines the direction of fluid movement across this region, into or out of the capillaries. When we have higher hydrostatic pressure than oncotic, we have filtration. And when we have hydrostatic pressure less than oncotic, we have re-absorption.
</li><li>And six, the veins are these low resistant conduits. The largest veins have a very large diameter. They're low resistance and they're going to have low volume. And the majority of the blood is actually found on the venule side. So about 1/3 of the blood is on the arteriole side. And, 1  2/3 of the blood is actually retained on the venule aside at any moment. But remember that this is a dynamic system, and there's constant flow of blood exiting the heart and then returning to the heart through these vessels. We can have sympathetic constriction of the veins that can increase venous return, that is our fill of the heart, and that's our sixth general concept. And that helps to increase stroke volume and cardiac output. 
</li><li>Seven, the lymphatic system provides a one way route for the return of interstitial fluid, which is called lymph, to the cardiovascular system and it's returning it at the level of the heart. 
</li><li>And eighth, we can have disease states that alter these hydrostatic and oncotic pressures that could then lead to edema. And these disease states will include heart failure where the cardiac output are pressured, or are altered the pressures are altered. Liver disease where the oncotic pressures are altered, kidney disease where again hydrostatic pressures are altered. And protein malnutrition where oncotic pressures are altered. And by changing these two parameters that is hydrostatic pressure and the oncotic pressures, we can then affect the distribution of fluids within the body and within the body cavities. </p>
</li></ul>

<p>So the next time we come in here then, we're going to talk about the actual central control of the cardiovascular system. And this is going to be the entire reflex loop. So see you then.</p>

<!-- 
NewPP limit report
Preprocessor node count: 2/1000000
Post-expand include size: 0/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 0/2097152 bytes
Expensive parser function count: 0/100
-->


</div><div class="printfooter">
Retrieved from "<a href="https://share.coursera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Humanphysio:Transcript_Lecture_4-4&amp;oldid=9448">https://share.coursera.org/wiki/index.php?title=Humanphysio:Transcript_Lecture_4-4&amp;oldid=9448</a>"</div>
					<div id='catlinks' class='catlinks catlinks-allhidden'></div>					<!-- end content -->
									</div>
			</div>