Please note these notes are provided by a fellow student on a best effort basis. There may be mistakes in the in the text or parts may have been left out.

##Lecture 2A: Does depression Look the Same Across the World?
Majority of research on mental health has been done in so-called high income countries. Referred to as the 10/90 gap. 4% of the research was in least developed countries while 80% of the people live there. 
We have to be careful in assuming our knowledge applies to other socio cultural contexts.

Category fallacy (Kleinman, 1987) applying a category that makes sense for a particular cultural group in another group, for whom this category may not make sense.

Two approaches in thinking about mental health across cultures:
Etic (universalist approach) 
* Disease perspective
* International classification systems (e.g. DSM, ICD)
* Start with 'Western' evidence-based treatments
Emic (local approach) 
* Illness perspective
* Local terminology and ethnopsychology
* Build on locally available treatments for mental health

Research in four African countries came up with different names for depression but the commonalities were overwhelming sadness and social withdrawel. Related to loss, poverty, disputes and worries. This is the same like in western countries
But participants emphasized somatic (physical) problems). 

Seems like some elements are cultural others are generic for depression. 


##Lecture 2B: Is Depression relevant in Low- and Middle-Income Countries?
In primary care settings, anxiety/depressive/somatic complaints are highly common and often present together: 'common mental disorders' (paraplu begrip)

During pregnancy and postpartum: perinatal common mental disorders.

Prenatal: 15.6% prevalence
Postnatal: 19.8% prevalence

Maternal depression in LMCI associated with a range of negative symptoms:
Underweight children, stunted children, Diarrhea, Cognitive, emotional development (insecure attachment), infectious illness and hospital admission, reduced completion immunization.

Women's mental health is crucial to achieving the millennium development goals. So yes, depression is a relevant issue in Low- and Middle-Income countries.

##Lecture 2C: What Predicts Depression in Low- and Middle-Income Countries?
_Determinants of perinatal common mental disorder:_
Socioeconomic disadvantage, unintended pregnancy, being younger, being unmarried, lacking intimate partner empathy and support, hostile in-laws, experiencing intimate partner violence, insufficient emotional and practical support, giving birth to a female (in some settings) and history of mental health problems.
_Protective factors:_
More education, permanent job, being of the ethnic majority, having a kind trustworthy intimate partner. 

_Poverty_ not just a risk for perinatal mental disorder, but in general. More consistent for general mental disorder relation with education, food security, housing, social class, socioeconomic status and financial stress.

_Violence_ weighted prevalence of depression in violent situations 17.3%. Predictor of depression: # of potentially traumatic events, torture and residency status in asylum seekers. time since conflict is a protective feature.  

##Lecture 2D: How Can We Treat & Prevent Depression in Low- and Middle-Income Countries?
There are good solutions for depression in low and middle-Income countries. Quite similar to high income solutions. Medication, counseling alone or in groups. 

Treatment of meternal depression, benefits for the children: Improved mother-infant interaction, better cognitive development and growth, reduced diarrhea, increased immunization rates.

MhGap program - WHO(mental health gap) 
Large treatment gap in LMIC (low and middle-Income countries)
Priority is scaling up interventions 
One these priority mental health diseases is depression. The MH-gap intervention guide shows a flowchart to easily see what to do next.

Next to treatment we need to look at prevention. A lot of stressor are social factors. 
1. Improve daily living conditions
2. tackle the inequitable distribution of power, money and resources
3. Measure and understand the problem and assess the impact of action

_Does addressing poverty improve mental health?_
Poverty and mental health problem are bidirectional. Poverty causes mental health problems but mental health problems also cause poverty. 
At the moment there isn't enough information to conclude whether reducing poverty decreases mental health problems. But dependent on nature of intervention (loans, cash, level of active involvement required. 
Different poverty reduction methods have different effect on mental health. Hard to see cause and effect.
